
==== Front
Arch Virol
Arch. Virol
Archives of Virology
0304-8608 1432-8798 Springer Vienna Vienna 

22012269
1145
10.1007/s00705-011-1145-2
Brief Review
Requirements for empirical immunogenicity trials, rather than structure-based design, for developing an effective HIV vaccine
Van Regenmortel Marc H. V. vanregen@unistra.fr 12 1 grid.11956.3a000000012214904XStellenbosch Institute of Advanced Study (STIAS), Wallenberg Research Center at Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, 7600 South Africa 
2 grid.11843.3f0000000121579291Present Address: CNRS/UDS UMR7242, Institut de Recherche de l’Ecole de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg (IREBS), Université de Strasbourg, 67400 Illkirch, France 
20 10 2011 
2012 
157 1 1 20
20 7 2011 7 10 2011 © Springer-Verlag 2011This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.The claim that it is possible to rationally design a structure-based HIV-1 vaccine is based on misconceptions regarding the nature of protein epitopes and of immunological specificity. Attempts to use reverse vaccinology to generate an HIV-1 vaccine on the basis of the structure of viral epitopes bound to monoclonal neutralizing antibodies have failed so far because it was not possible to extrapolate from an observed antigenic structure to the immunogenic structure required in a vaccine. Vaccine immunogenicity depends on numerous extrinsic factors such as the host immunoglobulin gene repertoire, the presence of various cellular and regulatory mechanisms in the immunized host and the process of antibody affinity maturation. All these factors played a role in the appearance of the neutralizing antibody used to select the epitope to be investigated as potential vaccine immunogen, but they cannot be expected to be present in identical form in the host to be vaccinated. It is possible to rationally design and optimize an epitope to fit one particular antibody molecule or to improve the paratope binding efficacy of a monoclonal antibody intended for passive immunotherapy. What is not possible is to rationally design an HIV-1 vaccine immunogen that will elicit a protective polyclonal antibody response of predetermined efficacy. An effective vaccine immunogen can only be discovered by investigating experimentally the immunogenicity of a candidate molecule and demonstrating its ability to induce a protective immune response. It cannot be discovered by determining which epitopes of an engineered antigen molecule are recognized by a neutralizing monoclonal antibody. This means that empirical immunogenicity trials rather than structural analyses of antigens offer the best hope of discovering an HIV-1 vaccine.

Keywords
Vaccine ImmunogenReverse VaccinologyDiscontinuous EpitopeAntipeptide AntibodyMembrane Proximate External Regionissue-copyright-statement© Springer-Verlag 2012
==== Body
Introduction
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is the virus we know most about [1] and its antigenic structure has been analyzed in considerable detail [2–6]. Many studies have been devoted to the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein (Env) present as spikes embedded in the viral membrane. Each functional spike consists of trimers of three gp120 surface glycoproteins non-covalently attached to three gp41 transmembrane glycoproteins. In addition to functional trimers, the viral membrane may also display gp120-gp41 monomers, single gp41 molecules and other non-functional fragments [7–9]. The antigenicity of the spikes has been studied extensively and numerous Env epitopes have been shown to induce a wide range of neutralizing antibodies in HIV-1 infected individuals [4, 10–17]. As a result, the antigenic sites of the Env protein have been considered promising candidates for developing a preventive HIV vaccine able to provide prophylactic immunity [18–22].

Many studies have been undertaken to determine the structure of epitopes bound to neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) in the hope that such epitopes could be turned into effective vaccine immunogens [23, 24]. The strategy of trying to develop a vaccine by studying the interaction of human Mabs with HIV-1 Env epitopes has been called reverse vaccinology because it attempts to generate a vaccine from the known structure of neutralizing antibodies rather than by following the reverse, more common approach of generating protective antibodies by immunization [23, 24]. When crystallographers study the structure of an Env epitope recognized by a neutralizing Mab, they often claim that their data will help the rational design of vaccine immunogens able to elicit antibodies endowed with the same neutralizing capacity as the Mab used to define the epitope [25–27].

In vaccine development, the term design usually means selecting a vaccine candidate and finding appropriate vaccine formulations, schedules, adjuvants and routes of administration. The strategy of rational, structure-based design discussed here is more circumscribed since it refers to the development and optimization of a vaccine immunogen within the restricted context of a single Mab-antigen pair. This approach assumes that if a viral antigen can be modified so that it binds better to a neutralizing Mab, it will have acquired the immunogenic capacity of eliciting neutralizing polyclonal antibodies [28].

It will be argued here that the claims of reverse vaccinology are based (1) on misconceptions regarding the nature of protein epitopes and of immunological specificity, (2) on the assumption that a discontinuous epitope defined by X-ray crystallography can act as an effective vaccine immunogen on its own without being embedded in a multi-epitopic protein that always induces many different types of antibodies, (3) on the belief that effective vaccine immunogens can be predicted from the antigenic structure of viral antigens bound to neutralizing Mabs.

Research carried out over the last two decades has demonstrated that reverse vaccinology has not been able to guide the design of an HIV vaccine nor of any other viral vaccine [29]. The present review expands on an earlier analysis of the limitations of reverse vaccinology [29] and shows that antibody polyspecificity explains why elucidating the structure of viral epitopes recognized by a neutralizing Mab is of little use for discovering immunogens capable of inducing a protective immune response. It may be advisable, therefore, to shift the current emphasis in HIV vaccine research from a rational design approach based on the structural analysis of Env epitopes to a more empirical approach that investigates possible therapeutic benefits that may result from the administration of a variety of HIV-1 vaccine immunogens [30].

The nature of protein epitopes
The regions of antigen molecules recognized by antibody molecules are called epitopes while the regions of antibodies that bind to epitopes are called paratopes. Both regions are identified by solving the 3D structure of antigen-antibody complexes and determining which amino acid residues in the two partners make contact with each other.

Discontinuous epitopes
The vast majority of protein epitopes have been found to be discontinuous [31–33] and to consist of two to five short stretches of residues that are distant in the protein sequence but are brought together by the folding of the peptide chain. Most HIV-1 epitopes that have been characterized are discontinuous epitopes [34–37]. The atomic groups forming a discontinuous epitope are not held together by internal chemical bonds and the epitope is a 3D entity that emerges only because the chain acts as a scaffold. If the scaffold is perturbed, for instance by a change in chain conformation or by denaturation of the protein, the epitope ceases to exist [38, 39]. Discontinuous epitopes cannot be extracted and isolated in active form from the protein antigen and they possess binding activity only within the context of the 3D protein structure in which they are embedded (Fig. 1). In spite of claims to the contrary, it is not possible to predict the exact structure of a discontinuous epitope from nucleotide or amino acid sequences [40–43].Fig. 1 Discontinuous epitope of the outer surface protein A of the spirochete Borrelia burdorferi elucidated by X-ray crystallography from a complex with Mab 184.1. (A) Outline of the epitope in yellow, (B) Position in space of the residues comprising the epitope. This set of residues cannot be isolated as such from the protein to demonstrate that it possesses binding activity in its own. (C) Parts of the discontinuous epitope and other peptide segments of the protein that may be able to bind Mab 184.1, in which case they would be called continuous epitopes (courtesy of Pernille Haste-Andersen, Danish Technical University)




Continuous epitopes
A second type of protein epitope known as a continuous epitope is defined as any short peptide fragment of the protein, usually five to eight residues long, that is able to cross-react with antibodies raised against the protein. When linear peptides are given the status of continuous epitopes of a protein, the impression is created that these epitopes actually exist as discrete binding and immunogenic sites in the native protein. In most cases, however, only some of the residues of a continuous epitope are located at the surface of the native protein where they are usually part of a more complex discontinuous epitope (Fig. 1). Although epitope databases list thousands of continuous epitopes presumed to exist in individual proteins [44, 45], these linear peptides are actually poor mimics of the larger antigenic structures present in native proteins and they mostly cross-react only weakly with antiprotein antibodies [46]. When the structure of continuous epitopes bound to anti-peptide antibodies is compared to the structure of the corresponding regions in the cognate native protein, the two structures are usually found to differ considerably, with the result that most antibodies raised against the peptides are unable to bind to the parent protein because bumps and clashes prevent antibody binding [47].

Continuous epitopes always have ill-defined, fuzzy boundaries because they are only defined by their binding activity rather than by showing that all the residues in the peptide interact with antiprotein antibodies [46]. Attempts are sometimes made to assess the boundaries of continuous epitopes by measuring the binding activity of peptides of decreasing size and giving the status of epitope to the smallest peptide that retains detectable activity. However, the results of such analyses depend on the immunoassay used because the peptide conformation usually differs in different types of assay [48]. In some assays, tripeptides can be shown to possess significant binding activity [49]. The contribution of individual residues to the epitope activity can also be evaluated by measuring the binding capacity of sets of peptide analogs presenting single residue replacements. When this is done, certain residues are found to be essential for binding while others, called replaceable residues, can be replaced by any of the other 19 amino acids without impairing antigenic reactivity [50, 51]. When a residue substitution is found to affect the epitope activity, it could mean that the residue is in contact with the paratope or that the substitution induced a conformational change which affects the reactivity of the peptide.

It has been suggested that most continuous epitopes are not genuine epitopes of native proteins but correspond to unfolded regions in denatured proteins that are recognized by antibodies directed to denatured molecules [38]. It can, indeed, never be excluded that the antiprotein antiserum used for detecting continuous epitopes contains antibodies specific for denatured protein molecules because some of the protein molecules used for immunization became denatured before or after being injected in the animal [52]. In the reciprocal situation where antibodies raised to peptides are allowed to react with the cognate protein, it also cannot be excluded that the antibodies recognize denatured protein molecules present in the immunoassay format that was used [53]. It is now accepted, for instance, that earlier claims that immunization with peptides always elicits high levels of antibodies that cross-react with the native cognate protein [54] arose because it was not realized at the time that the protein used in solid-phase immunoassays became denatured by adsorption to plastic [46, 55]. The classification of epitopes as either continuous or discontinuous may give the impression that the fundamental units of antigenic recognition are amino acid residues, although epitope-paratope interactions involve only a few atoms in each residue which may be side chain or main chain atoms. It should also be appreciated that various crystallographic groups often use different criteria for identifying which contact residues are involved in an interface [50]. For instance, contact residues in the epitope have been defined as those that have any atom less than 0.5 nm away from any atom in the antibody [56]. Other distance thresholds have been used for identifying different types of contact, for instance 0.35 nm for hydrogen bonds and salt bridges, 0.4 nm for van der Waals interactions and 0.45 nm for π cation interactions [47]. The use of different thresholds may lead to different residues being attributed to the binding interface.

Neotopes and cryptotopes
The quaternary structure of the protein subunits assembled in virus particles gives rise to additional types of epitopes known as neotopes and cryptotopes. The term neotope was introduced in 1966 [57] to refer to epitopes that arise either from the juxtaposition of residues in neighbouring proteins or subunits that are recognized by antibodies as a single epitope, or from conformational changes induced in the proteins by intersubunit interactions [58]. Neotopes have been found in the capsid and membrane proteins of most viruses [59, 60] and are also present in HIV-1 [61–63]. Since the quaternary structure of virions is dynamic rather than static [64, 65], neotopes tend to be transient epitopes that can assume different conformations [4, 21].

When the glycoproteins in HIV-1 spikes associate to form trimers, a part of their surface is no longer accessible to antibodies. These masked regions harbour epitopes known as cryptotopes [66] that are active only when the subunits are dissociated [61].

There is evidence that differences in the quaternary structure of gp120 between primary HIV-1 isolates, i.e. viruses that have been minimally passaged in cell lines, and T-cell line adapted (TCLA) isolates are responsible for their differential sensitivity to neutralization. It seems that a more open gp 120 conformation in TCLA viruses allows neutralizing antibodies to access more easily the binding sites for CD4 and for the coreceptors CCR5 and CXCR4 as well as the V3 loop [13, 67, 68].

Mimotopes
Another type of linear peptide epitope was recognized in 1986 and given the label mimotope [69]. Mimotopes are detected when peptides from combinatorial peptide libraries obtained by chemical synthesis or phage display are tested for their ability to bind antiprotein Mabs that recognize either continuous or discontinuous epitopes [70]. When the Mabs are directed to discontinuous epitopes, they may bind to peptides showing little or no sequence similarity with the antigen used to elicit the antiprotein antibodies. Antigenic cross-reactions occurring in the absence of sequence similarities may arise from the overriding attraction between hydrophilic and hydrophobic groups that occurs when a pattern of hydropathic complementarity is conserved in dissimilar peptide sequences [71, 72]. Such a phenomenon is responsible for the binding of complementary peptides specified by the sense and antisense strands of DNA molecules because their respective codons always code for amino acids of opposite hydropathicity [73, 74].

When Mabs used to detect mimotopes recognize a continuous epitope in a protein, there is sometimes extensive sequence identity between the mimotope and the continuous epitope. In the case of two neutralizing Mabs that recognized the same 7-residue sequence present in the surface glycoprotein of a murine coronavirus and in several mimotopes, it was found that the two Mabs presented little similarity in their heavy chain complementarity determining regions (CDRs), indicating that two paratopes that recognize similar sequences can be very different [75]. It is also often found that Mabs harbouring unrelated paratopes are able to recognize very similar discontinuous epitopes [76–78], suggesting that it may be difficult to control the type of antibody that will be obtained when very similar epitopes are used as immunogens.

A limited number of mimotopes may also be able to induce antibodies that cross-react with the protein [79–81] and show a modest capacity to neutralize viral infectivity [82, 83]. The antigenic and immunogenic activities of mimotopes often depend on their conformation. For instance, when mimotopes are displayed on a phage, they may better mimic the conformation of a viral epitope than when they are used as free peptides or conjugated to a carrier protein [70, 84, 85]. Mimotopes displayed on a phage protein may also be better elicitors of antibodies that cross-react with the virus and neutralize its infectivity [75]. Although several mimotopes of HIV-1 epitopes have been isolated from combinatorial peptide libraries [84–88] none of them were able, when used as immunogens, to elicit adequate levels of neutralizing and protective antibodies.

What do mimotopes mimic?
Many peptides that are given the label mimotope because they cross-react with an antiprotein Mab do not necessarily bind only to residues of the known antiprotein paratope since they may interact with neighbouring residues that are part of a different paratope recognized by the mimotope. As a result, many so-called mimotopes do not really mimic the epitope recognized by the Mab but simply react with polyspecific immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules that always possess numerous potential binding sites for different epitopes (see “The specificity of antibodies is limited rather than absolute”).

The most commonly used procedure for assessing what a mimotope recognizes is to test whether it is able to inhibit the binding of the Mab to its homologous antigen. If the mimotope is found to compete with the antigen for binding to the Mab, this is usually taken as sufficient evidence that it mimics the epitope recognized by the Mab [70, 84]. This criterion for establishing mimicry is actually questionable since the binding inhibition could simply be due to the fact that steric hindrance prevents the mimotope from binding to a neighbouring paratope in the Ig binding pocket of the Mab. If an antibody recognizes two unrelated epitopes through separate, non-overlapping paratopes, it would of course make little sense to say that the two epitopes are antigenic mimics of each other. If the mimotope presents some sequence similarity with portions of the epitope, this is taken as evidence that the mimotope binds to the putative paratope of the Mab. However, it is equally plausible that the mimotope binds to its “own” specific site consisting of a neighbouring set of residues. Furthermore, if the mimotope is able to elicit antibodies that recognize the epitope believed to be mimicked, this is taken as confirming evidence that the mimotope exactly mimicks the epitope.

The antigenic mimicry displayed by a mimotope, however, does not imply that the peptide is a precise structural mimic making identical contacts with the paratope to those made by the epitope that elicited the antibody, since a modest similarity between two antigens may be sufficient to give rise to a cross-reaction involving overlapping but different paratopes. The concept of immunogenic mimicry is even more difficult to define in structural terms than antigenic mimicry, since it involves undefined functional activities in the immunized host as well as unknown characteristics of the immunogen that elicit the appearance of cross-reactive antibodies [70].

The specificity of antibodies is limited rather than absolute
The concept of specificity in immunology has been difficult to define [89–92]. The term specificity is derived from the word species and describes what is characteristic of a species [93]. For centuries, biological species were considered to be separated by clear-cut discontinuities and in the 19th century bacteriologists believed that antisera raised against different species of bacteria were completely specific, allowing different species to be identified by serology with absolute certainty [94]. This view was later questioned by Landsteiner [95] who showed that serological cross-reactions between different cell types were caused by antibodies that reacted to different degrees with a wide range of cells. He demonstrated that there was no one-to-one relationship between an antigen and its antibody and that an antigen could elicit a wide spectrum of antibodies capable of cross-reacting with many antigens. This led to antigen-antibody interactions being regarded as much less specific than previously thought and is nowadays explained by the widespread occurrence of cross-reactions between different epitopes and paratopes. The work of Landsteiner led Talmadge [96] to suggest that immunological specificity was not the result of a unique antibody molecule recognizing each distinguishable antigen but arose from the combinatorial effect of several different antibodies recognizing separate epitopes on the same antigen. According to that interpretation, a specific antigen recognition or elimination process is always initiated by several binding events involving different antibodies.

Specificity has been defined as “the exact complementary relationship between an agent and something acted on” [97], a definition which applies to the stereochemical complementarity observed between antigen and antibody, enzyme and substrate or receptor and ligand. In the case of antibodies, the recognition of a complementary antigen is mediated by the binding site of Ig molecules consisting of 50-70 hypervariable residues distributed over the six CDRs in the variable domains of the heavy of light Ig chains. Each immunoglobulin binding site can accommodate many overlapping or non-overlapping binding subsites of 10-20 residues, corresponding to paratopes able to bind different antigens. An Ig molecule may, for instance, possess two independent binding sites that allow it to bind simultaneously to phosphorylcholine and to α-D-galactopyranoside [98]. A more common situation is that different paratope subsites partly overlap, in which case binding to one epitope would prevent a second related or unrelated epitope from being accommodated at a nearby location in the Ig binding site. All antibody molecules are therefore polyspecific since they always harbor numerous subsites corresponding to paratopes specific for different epitopes. The flexibility of CDR loops also contributes to the ability of Igs to adapt to a variety of epitopes [99–101]. It is important to distinguish between an actual paratope and the virtual functional site of an Ig molecule consisting of all the residues of the six CDRs which, however, do not form a binding site for any particular epitope.

Degeneracy of the immune system and fuzzy recognition sites
Many terms such as cross-reactivity, molecular mimicry, plasticity, promiscuity, degeneracy and polyspecificity have been used to describe the finding that a T cell receptor (TCR) and B cell receptor (BCR) can recognize many different ligands [90, 102, 103]. The term polyspecificity is particularly fitting because it captures two essential features of immune receptors, i.e. their ability to recognize multiple peptide/MHC (major histocompatibility complex) ligands or B cell epitopes as well as their capacity to distinguish between closely related ligands that present only very small structural differences [104].

The term cross-reactivity does not imply that a particular mechanism is responsible for recognition but it suggests that there is a primary ligand for each TCR and BCR and that the binding of all other ligands are cases of cross-reaction. In reality, there is no single intrinsic or “real” epitope for any immune receptor but only a diverse group of potential ligands [104]. Cross-reactivity is also said to occur when an immune response and the resulting secreted antibodies directed at one antigen are able to interact with other antigens that did not stimulate the original reaction [103]. Cross-reactivity then refers to a lack of specificity.

Degeneracy is the ability of elements that are structurally different to perform the same activity or function. Degeneracy may yield the same or different functions depending on the context in which it is expressed [105]. The genetic code, for instance, is degenerate because there are many more triplet codons than encoded amino acid residues. As a result, an enormous number of structurally distinct mRNA species could be translated to generate the amino acid sequence of any particular protein. Degeneracy is further increased when one includes variations in polynucleotide sequences that result in mutated but functionally equivalent gene products [105]. In immunology, degeneracy refers not only to the ability of structurally different antibodies to perform the same recognition function but also to the ability of a single antibody to perform multiple functions like binding to different antigens. Degeneracy is a property of a system as a whole and not of its single components [103]. The degeneracy of T cell recognition refers to the fact that peptide-binding motifs are polyspecific for MHC class molecules and that a single TCR can be activated by a large number of different peptides possessing limited sequence similarity. The degeneracy of the immunoglobulins made by an animal ensures that the animal has the ability to make antibodies which recognize essentially any molecular motif which its immune system may encounter. If each immunological receptor could only recognize a single complementary ligand, the immune system would need one receptor for every possible epitope which would require orders of magnitude more receptors than there are cells in the immune system. It is only because of polyspecificity that a complete immune repertoire can be achieved by a much more restricted number of receptors [104]. Degeneracy is also a prerequisite to allow organisms to adapt over evolutionary time since natural selection can only operate among a population of dissimilar organisms [105].

The description of protein binding sites as fuzzy recognition sites was introduced by Moodie et al [106] to account for the finding that protein-ligand complementarity can be achieved by not just a single arrangement of amino acids but by a large number of alternative arrangements. Epitopes have also been called fuzzy recognition sites because there is no clear-cut minimum difference in binding affinity or in atomic positions at the antigen-antibody interface that can serve as an absolute yardstick for deciding that two epitopes are the same or not [93, 107]. The use of fuzziness as a descriptor of reality is useful for handling concepts and entities that do not possess clear-cut boundaries [108]. Whereas classical, Aristotelian logic analyses concepts and classes in terms of mutually exclusive dichotomies of the type: a glass is full or is not full and a statement is true or not true, fuzzy logic is a method to handle a continuum with innumerable steps [108–110]. Linguistic descriptors are often assumed to refer to entities that possess sharp boundaries because they satisfy the propensity of the human mind to want to make clear-cut distinctions. The continuous nature of the spectrum of electromagnetic waves does not prevent us from distinguishing different colors and the continuity of geological rock formations does not stop us from giving different names to individual mountain peaks. In a similar way, the continuous nature of biological variation and of protein evolution does not prevent us from distinguishing and giving separate names to individual biological species, antigenic binding sites and antibodies [93].

Even the classical tenet of immunological theory which posits the need of the immune system to discriminate between self and nonself [90], has been interpreted in terms of fuzzy recognition sites [111] and complex systems [112]. It used to be believed that T cells in the thymus were either clearly responsive or unresponsive to self and foreign antigens but there is now evidence that many self-reactive T cells which escape from clonal selection as a result of low affinity interactions with self-peptides, eventually become part of the general T cell repertoire [113]. The occurrence of antibodies able to react with foreign antigens results from selective forces operating during immunization which depend on reactant concentration and on the probability of receptor binding and lymphocyte stimulation occurring above a certain triggering threshold [114, 115].

Epitopes and paratopes are relational entities
Once an Ig molecule has been found to bind to an antigen, it becomes possible to solve the structure of the antigen-antibody complex and to identify the paratope and epitope regions. Epitopes and paratopes are actually relational entities defined by their mutual complementarity and they depend on each other to acquire a recognizable identity. An epitope is thus not an intrinsic structural feature of a protein that could be identified in the absence of a particular interaction with a paratope [39, 46]. This relational dependence means that as soon as the epitope is slightly altered and binding to the antibody is affected, the paratope also is no longer the same. As a result, analyzing the antigenicity of a protein amounts to analyzing the size of the immunological repertoire of the host immunized with that protein. The number of epitopes identifiable in a protein is therefore equal to the number of different Mabs that can be raised against it. Using this criterion, the insulin molecule was shown to possess 115 epitopes [116] and the BLysS molecule more than a thousand [117]. This analysis differs from the viewpoint advocated by Cohn [90] which defines a “paratopic clan” as a family of paratopes, distinguishable one from the other, that are all functionally capable to recognize a given single epitope. Cohn further defines a “mimotopic array” as a set of epitopes, distinguishable one from the other, that are all able to interact functionally with a given single paratope.

Epitopes and antigenic sites
It is now accepted that the entire accessible surface of a protein harbours a large number of overlapping epitopes that can be detected only if Mabs that bind all these regions are available [118, 119]. This means that the same residues at the surface of a protein can always be part of different overlapping epitopes. Even if the majority of residues recognized by two different Mabs are the same, the chemical bonding pattern between epitope and paratope may be very different and involve totally unrelated CDR sequences [78]. When only a small number of Mabs are available for studying the antigenicity of a protein, investigators tend to give undue importance to spurious boundaries assumed to demarcate discrete antigenic regions and they disregard the fact that the protein surface is an antigenic continuum. This leads to an analytical bias that emphasizes immune responses elicited by single epitopes rather than fostering an examination of the beneficial neutralizing synergy that often result from the combined interactions of several independent epitopes and paratopes [120–122]. Restricting one’s attention to single epitopes also negates the insight of Talmadge [96] that specific interactions result from the combined effect of several independent recognition events.

Although it is impossible to draw distinct boundaries between overlapping epitopes, it is customary to refer to the existence of separate antigenic sites in proteins, each one comprising many overlapping or non-overlapping epitopes. Each antigenic site is identified on the protein surface on the basis of a recognizable spatial location as well as by certain structural and functional properties. Several antigenic sites of HIV-1 Env spikes have been extensively studied, for instance the CD4 binding site (CD4bs) which is the region that allows the virus to attach to its primary CD4 receptor on the surface of target cells [16, 119, 123], the V3 antigenic site [4, 10, 17] and the membrane proximate external region (MPER) of gp41 [5, 11, 18].

Antibody heterospecificity
Antibody heterospecificity is the ability of an antibody to bind more strongly to a different antigen than the one used for raising the antibody and is frequently observed when an antibody is tested against a series of analogs or mutants of the immunogen [125–128]. Heterospecificity is due to the fact that the clonal selection of B cells, which subsequently leads to antibody secretion in plasma cells, can be triggered by an immunogen endowed with only moderate affinity for a B cell receptor. Antibodies of low or moderate affinity will then be obtained which may react better with heterologous epitopes endowed with a superior degree of complementarity with the paratope [39]. In some cases, antibodies may have such a low affinity for the immunogen that they will not react with it at all and will only bind to a mutated antigen presenting a substitution that facilitates heterospecific binding. The technique of intragel cross-absorption of antisera is particularly suitable for detecting this phenomenon [129]. It is well-known that following immunization with an antigen, antisera are obtained that contain levels of total immunoglobulins that far exceed the levels of antibodies able to react in immunoassays with the administered antigen [130]. A likely explanation of this difference is that B cell responses are degenerate and trigger the secretion not only of Igs that can function as detectable antibodies with the homologous antigen but also of heterospecific antibodies that have an affinity for the immunogen below the threshold required for binding to it although they may be able to bind to other, related antigens.

Specificity versus discrimination potential
The specificity of antibodies is inversely related to their ability to cross-react with a variety of antigens [131]. Part of the confusion surrounding the concept of specificity arises when no distinction is made between a single epitope and a multiepitopic antigen. If an investigator wishes to differentiate between two antigenically related proteins using a panel of Mabs, an antibody that recognizes the same epitope in both molecules would be called nonspecific whereas an antibody recognizing an epitope present in only one of them would be considered specific [93]. Since an antibody would thus be called specific or non specific, depending on what the investigator is trying to achieve, it is preferable to refer to the discrimination potential of antibodies raised against a multiepitopic antigen. An antibody, of course, cannot be specific for a multiepitopic protein and it will at best only have a limited specificity for an individual epitope. That an antibody is always able to cross-react with many related epitopes is also demonstrated by the ability of large numbers of peptide analogs presenting amino acid replacements at each residue position to react with the same antibody [50, 51, 132].

Antibody specificity and affinity
It is often believed that antibody specificity is correlated with high affinity because it is expected that highly specific antibodies will possess a better stereochemical complementarity with their antigens than antibodies of lower affinity. There is, however, no necessary link between affinity and specificity since antibodies of lower affinity may discriminate better between two antigens than do antibodies of higher affinity. The reason for this is that low affinity antibodies tend to detect fewer cross-reactions than antibodies of high affinity since cross-reactions are usually weaker than homologous reactions and will more quickly drop below the level of detection [93]. It must also be emphasized that in the same way that epitopes and paratopes are defined only through their mutual relationship, the affinity of an antibody can only be defined with respect to a binary relationship with a single antigen. In contrast, the specificity of an antibody is a ternary relational property that is meaningful only with respect to a more complex set of relations between one antibody and at least two antigens, the reason being that specificity arises from the ability of an antibody to react differently with two or more antigens and thus to discriminate between them.

Discontinuous epitopes cannot be extracted from their protein environment to be used as vaccine immunogens
The failure of reverse vaccinology in developing an HIV-1 vaccine is partly due to the unwarranted expectation that the structural delineation of discontinuous HIV-1 epitopes bound to neutralizing Mabs should allow these epitopes to be used as successful vaccine immunogens. As discussed above, a discontinuous epitope corresponds to a set of non-contiguous residues which cannot be isolated as a separate entity to show it possesses binding activity outside the protein context. Many unsuccessful attempts have been made to reconstitute the exact structure of discontinuous epitopes by chemical synthesis [78 and references therein; 133] and it does not seem possible to reproduce their exact immunological activity in the absence of the scaffolding contribution of the peptide chain. As a result, the immunogenic capacity of a discontinuous epitope can only be evaluated by using the native protein in which it is embedded as an immunogen, a procedure that will always stimulate an heterogeneous immune response against the numerous epitopes of the protein. For instance, when antibodies are raised against the CD4bs surface of gp120, most of them do not possess the exceptional neutralizing capacity of Mab b12 [134].

When a multiepitopic protein is used as immunogen, various epitopes will selectively bind to the B cell receptors present in the immunized host for which they possess sufficient affinity. However, the epitopes will not preferentially bind to those rare receptors, which in addition to recognizing the epitope, are responsible for the subsequent secretion by plasmocytes of antibodies that neutralize viral infectivity. The selection of B cell receptors during immunization is blind to the presence of neutralizing anti-viral activity in the antibodies that will be secreted since this biological function becomes effective only during the subsequent infection of a host. Furthermore, even if a single discontinuous epitope could somehow be used as an immunogen, the probability is still extremely low that a selectable B cell receptor would be present in the immunized host that exactly matches the variable immunoglobulin gene and CDR sequences of the Mab used for identifying the discontinuous epitope. Unfortunately, we do not know how to elicit neutralizing rather than non-neutralizing antibodies since it is not clear which features of an immunogen and immunized host are responsible for the cross-protective immunogenic activity that is required from any vaccine candidate [19, 135–137].

The unsuccessful search for immunogens able to elicit b12-like antibodies
The difficulties encountered when one attempts to design a vaccine immunogen on the basis of the known structure of a neutralizing antibody recognizing a discontinuous HIV-1 epitope are clearly demonstrated in the case of the b12 antibody. This Mab which was obtained from a phage-displayed Fab library derived from an HIV-1 patient [138] recognizes a conserved discontinuous epitope overlapping the CD4bs of gp120. It neutralizes a wide range of primary and TCLA HIV-1 isolates by inhibiting the binding of gp120 to the CD4 receptor. Antibody b12 has an 18-residue long CDR H3 region, a feature present in many anti-CD4bs human Mabs, allowing them to penetrate into a hydrophobic cavity on the gp120 surface. Using a docking model of b12 onto gp120, several contact residues of the epitope were identified and their contribution to binding activity was evaluated by alanine mutagenesis [26]. The gp120 structure that was used for docking b12 was the only one available at the time and corresponds to that of a monomeric core complexed with CD4 and with the Fab 17b [139], and it may therefore not correspond to the conformation of the trimeric CD4bs seen by antibodies and by the immune system. It is known that when gp120 binds to CD4, it undergoes a large conformational change which allows the virus to bind to one of its chemokine coreceptors [140, 141].

In an attempt to identify an HIV-1 vaccine immunogen capable of eliciting b12-like neutralizing antibodies, peptide libraries displayed on filamentous phage have been used to select peptides that bind b12 [84]. A 15-residue peptide labeled B2.1 with the sequence H1ERSYMFSDLENRCI15 was found to bind b12 with considerable affinity when it was present as a disulfide-bridged homodimer involving two C14 residues. The residues S8, D9, C14 and I15 of peptide B2.1 were present in several of the selected mimotope peptides and were considered to be responsible for most of their binding activity [84]. The peptide B2.1 shows significant homology to the D-loop region (residues: R273SVNFTDNAKTII285) of gp120 and appeared to be an exact conformational mimic of the D-loop region. When the immunogenicity of B2.1 was tested in mice and rabbits no antibodies were obtained that cross-reacted with gp120, indicating that B2.1 was not an effective candidate vaccine immunogen.

In another study, additional mimotopes reacting with b12 were obtained which possessed the same consensus sequence M/VθSD (where θ represents an aromatic amino acid) found in the D2.1 peptide [85]. Second and third generation libraries were constructed which gave rise to the improved consensus sequence G/SLL/MVWSDEL/H that reacted even more strongly with b12. Phage-displayed peptides containing this sequence competed with the binding of gp120 to b12 and were therefore considered to mimic the epitope recognized by b12. In contrast to what had been found with the B2.1 peptide, immunization with these more active phage-displayed mimotopes were able to elicit Env-specific antibodies, although immunization with the mimotopes conjugated to a carrier protein did not. Cross-reactive immune sera from immunized mice, however, did not neutralize laboratory-adapted strains of HIV-1 in vitro, showing that these improved mimotopes were also ineffective vaccine immunogens [85]. The conclusion that immunization with peptide mimics of discontinuous epitopes is not a feasible approach for developing epitope-targeted vaccines was corroborated in a recent study of mimotopes that mimicked discontinuous epitopes of three well-characterized proteins [142].

The inability of mimotopes reacting with the b12 antibody to elicit b12-like antibodies is due to the fact that these linear peptides do not reproduce the complex structural features of the discontinuous epitope recognized by Mab b12 and which presumably induced its formation. This was clearly demonstrated when the crystal structure of a complex between Fab of b12 and the B2.1 peptide was determined at 1.8 Å [143]. Only three of the critical binding residues of the B2.1 peptide (residues F7, S8 and D9) were found to form side-chain contacts with the b12 paratope while other residues important for the binding activity (Y5, C14, I15) only helped to stabilize the peptide structure. The B2.1 peptide is able to bind b12 not because it mimics the D-loop of gp120 but because it reacts with a different paratope subsite in b12 from the one that recognizes the complex discontinuous epitope determined by docking and mutagenesis studies [84, 124, 134]. Since the B2.1 peptide mimicks at best a very small portion of the discontinuous epitope recognized by b12, it is not surprising that this peptide is unable to elicit antibodies that cross-react with gp120 [143].

In an attempt to understand why Mab b12 possesses potent neutralizing properties whereas the majority of anti CDRbs Mabs do not, more than 60 residues of the CD4bs were mutated to alanine to determine whether these substitutions affected the ability of gp120 to bind to CD4 and to neutralizing and non-neutralizing Mabs [134]. Many substitutions were found to affect the binding of neutralizing and non-neutralizing Mabs in the same way, indicating a high degree of overlap in the epitopes recognized by these anti-CD4bs antibodies. Some of the mutations enhanced Mab binding but such an effect was never observed for CD4 binding, suggesting that the virus has evolved toward an optimal gp120-CD4 interaction. Although there were some individual differences between the effects of substitutions on the binding of different Mabs, no clear picture emerged that explained why b12 possessed a unique neutralizing capacity. Since certain residues in the V1/V2 and V3 loop of gp120 were able to affect the binding of b12, it was suggested that non-neutralizing anti-CD4bs Mabs might interact with the gp120 surface using a different orientation from the one used by b12 [134]. It is known that all anti-CD4bs Mabs bind monomeric gp120 similarly, independently of their neutralizing capacity, whereas only b12 is able to bind trimeric, functional gp120 presumably through neotopes present only on gp120 oligomers. This may be the reason why only native gp120 trimers are able to elicit an effective neutralizing antibody response [135, 144]. All attempts to find immunogens able to elicit b12-like antibodies were based on the premise that such immunogens must reproduce exactly the structure of the epitope recognized by b12 because it was assumed that the antigenic activity of an epitope is always accompanied by a related immunogenic activity. This assumption implies that antigenicity which is a chemical property arising from a molecular recognition process involving complementary antibodies is equivalent to immunogenicity which is a biological property leading to antibody secretion that occurs only in the context of an immunized host [145]. Immunogenicity depends on intrinsic properties of the immunogen but also on extrinsic factors such as the host Ig gene repertoire, the chance occurrence of appropriate B cell receptors, self-tolerance, an adequate production of cytokines, the presence of various cellular and regulatory mechanisms in the immunized host and the uncontrolled process of antibody affinity maturation [146, 147]. All these extrinsic factors did contribute to the occurrence of the neutralizing antibody initially used to identify the putative vaccine epitope but they cannot be expected to be present in identical form in the host that will be vaccinated with the same antigen. Another reason that makes it impossible to extrapolate from antigenic to immunogenic structures is that the structure of an epitope determined in a crystallographic complex is also influenced by processes of induced fit, conformational selection and mutual adaptation of the two binding partners [148–152]. As a result, the particular antigenic structure revealed in an antigen-antibody complex does not necessarily correspond to the immunogenic structure that was recognized by B cell receptors during the immunization process and should be present in the vaccine immunogen [29]. When tested in an immunoassay, a peptide may bind to an anti-protein neutralizing Mab by an induced fit mechanism driven by the pre-existing structure of the Mab. However, the same induced fit will not occur when the peptide is used as immunogen and is recognized by B cell receptors that have no special affinity for the cognate intact protein.

The assumption that immunogenic potential can be deduced from antigenic structures has led several groups to modify gp120 molecules in order to improve their vaccine potential. For instance, recombinant gp120s were generated that no longer were able to bind non-neutralizing anti CD4bs Mabs while retaining their capacity to bind b12, an approach called immunofocusing [153]. It was hoped that such a re-engineered gp120 would acquire the immunogenic capacity of eliciting only neutralizing antibodies, somehow mirroring the altered antigenic reactivity [134]. As was to be expected, there have been no subsequent reports indicating that the attempt to induce an immunogenic functionality in gp120 that mirrored the antigenic properties of the engineered constructs was successful. Recently a stabilized gp120 antigen, better able to bind neutralizing antibodies, has been developed by rational design [154]. The CD4bs of Env was re-engineered by deleting the V1 and V3 loops of the full gp120 molecule and introducing cross-links between different regions of the core protein. One of the re-engineered stabilized surfaces which reacted strongly with Mab b12 but not at all with four non-neutralizing CD4bs Mabs was used to select CD4bs-directed Mabs from memory B cells derived from a clade B-infected donor. A small number of CD4bs-specific memory B cells was obtained from about 25 millions peripheral blood mononuclear cells of the donor. One selected Mab (VRC01) neutralized about 90% of nearly 200 HIV isolates from multiple clades and had a much broader neutralizing capacity than b12 [154]. The authors suggested that their results do provide an important insight for future HIV-1 vaccine design, although they presented no evidence that their rationally designed antigen is also a superior immunogen able to induce VRC01-like polyclonal antibodies in humans.

Continuous epitopes of viral proteins are not effective vaccine immunogens
Although many linear peptide sequences in proteins cross-react with antibodies raised against the protein, they mostly are unable to elicit antibodies that cross-react with the native protein. The lack of cross-reactive immunogenicity of peptides [136] can be explained as follows. When an antiprotein antibody is tested for it ability to react with a peptide in an immunoassay, it may select one of the many available peptide conformations or it may bring it about by induced fit, the result in both cases being a detectable cross-reaction. In contrast, when the same peptide is confronted with a variety of B cell receptors during immunization, different conformations of the peptide may be recognized by separate receptors, leading to the subsequent appearance of a variety of antipeptide antibodies. However, there is no reason why the peptide would bind preferentially to those rare receptors which in addition also cross-react with a more complex epitope present only in the native protein. Since a peptide corresponding to a continuous epitope is nearly always a poor mimic of a protein discontinuous epitope, it is unlikely that a significant proportion of the elicited antipeptide antibodies would react with the cognate protein. Antibodies which do not recognize viral proteins will, of course, possess no neutralizing activity. It is sometimes possible to improve the cross-reactive immunogenicity of a peptide by increasing the conformational similarity between peptide and intact protein, for instance by cyclization of the peptide, but this approach rarely succeeds in producing immunogens able to elicit neutralizing antibodies [78 and references therein; 155, 156]. As discussed earlier in the case of discontinuous epitopes, linear peptides corresponding to continuous epitopes, when used as immunogens, will not preferentially select and bind to the rare B cell receptors which in addition to cross-reacting with the native protein also trigger a B cell differentiation process giving rise to antibodies endowed with a functional protective activity. Although a few mimotopes of several continuous epitopes of different viruses, including HIV-1, have been found to be able to elicit antibodies that cross-react with the virus and possess some neutralizing activity [75, 83, 88], no successful protective peptide-based antiviral vaccine has been developed and marketed for human use [157]. Two 6-residue long continuous epitopes located in the conserved region of MPER of gp41 have been regarded as promising HIV-1 vaccine candidates [18] and many groups have attempted to turn them into effective vaccine immunogens [5]. It seems highly unlikely, however, that these short linear peptides which are part of larger complex discontinuous epitopes eliciting potent neutralizing Mabs, will be able to induce an effective protective immune response [29].

The special case of terminal regions in proteins
The terminal regions of proteins frequently harbour continuous epitopes because they tend to be surface-oriented [158] and are more hydrophilic and mobile than internal regions [158–161]. A major purpose of epitope prediction is to replace intact antigen molecules by linear synthetic peptides for use as diagnostic reagents for detecting viral antibodies [162] or as immunogens for raising antipeptide antibodies able to cross-react with a parent protein [163, 164]. The most effective strategy in this case is to select 10-residue long synthetic peptides corresponding to the N- and C- terminal regions of the protein since these have the highest probability of cross-reacting antigenically with the protein. Methods for predicting which continuous epitopes in proteins are likely to be effective vaccine immunogens have been notoriously unsuccessful [43, 44, 165, 166] and only very limited success has been obtained when certain terminal peptides were used as vaccine immunogens. Vaccination with the N-terminal 15-residue peptide of the VP2 protein of canine parvovirus, for instance, was able to protect dogs against virus infection [167]. Another example is the C-terminal region of the VP1 protein (residues 200-213) of foot-and-mouth disease virus, which is able to elicit high levels of neutralizing antibodies [168]. Residues 200-213 of one VP1 subunit are located next to the immunodominant disordered loop (residues 141-160) of an adjacent subunit [169], and both regions contribute to a single discontinuous neotope [170]. The ability of the terminal regions of proteins to induce antibodies that cross-react with the native protein is partly due to the fact that these regions possess an intrinsic disorder which makes them very similar to the unstructured peptides [171]. Although some disordered regions in proteins may be recognized preferentially by antipeptide antibodies, the majority of viral epitopes capable of inducing a neutralizing antibody response are actually complex, discontinuous topographic sites rather than terminal linear peptides.

The HIV-1 V3 antigenic site
Loops and turns in proteins are often immunodominant antigenic regions and the V3 loop in HIV-1 has for many years been considered the principal neutralizing domain of the virus [10, 172]. Although it is designated as the third variable domain of gp120, the V3 loop has many conserved features such as a constant size of about 35 residues, a conserved type II turn at its tip and a disulfide bond at its base [173]. The semiconserved nature of the V3 loop allows it to play an important role in the recognition of viral co-receptors, but its sequence variability has led investigators to question its value as a target for vaccine-induced antibodies. Another reason that led investigators to doubt the value of the V3 loop as a vaccine candidate is that they looked for the presence of anti V3 antibodies in human anti-HIV-1 antisera by absorbing the sera with linear V3 peptides [174]. Since this absorption step did not remove the antibodies that neutralized primary HIV-1 isolates, it was concluded that the neutralizing antibodies were not directed against the V3 loop. In fact, human sera that neutralize both TCLA isolates and primary isolates from several HIV-1 clades contain antibodies that recognize a cyclic V3 conformation present in the virus and in disulfide-bonded V3 loops but absent in linear V3 peptides [4, 14, 17, 175, 176]. The V3 loop is very flexible and is able to adopt different conformations when it binds to different Mabs [177]. It was found that alternative β-hairpin conformations can be induced in the same V3 peptide, depending on whether it binds to Mab 447-52D that neutralizes both R5 and X4 viruses or to Mab 5β which neutralizes only X4 viruses [178]. This shows that the epitope conformation observed in a Mab-epitope complex can result from an induced fit process and is therefore not a reliable guide for deciding which immunogen conformation should be used for eliciting a certain type of neutralizing antibody. It is not yet clear whether intrinsically flexible V3 loops should be constrained in a particular conformation to increase their potential value as vaccine candidates [179]. In the case of the immunodominant GH loop (residues 141-160) of the VP1 protein of foot-and-mouth disease virus, a stabilized all-D retro loop synthesized with D-amino acids was found to induce higher levels of neutralizing antibodies that the corresponding L-peptide [180–182].

One of the many hurdles to be overcome by an HIV-1 vaccine is the antigenic variability of the virus
There are several reasons why the strategies that were used successfully in the past to develop effective vaccines against many viral diseases are not applicable to HIV-1 [183–185]: (1) Since the natural immune response in HIV-1 infected individuals does not clear the infection, there is no natural immunological mechanism that the vaccine could imitate. An HIV-1 vaccine would thus have to surpass the normal immune response induced by infection and would for instance have to generate a far stronger response against conserved epitopes than what occurs during infection; (2) HIV-1 integrates into the host genome and establishes a latent pool of infected cells that conceal the virus from immune recognition; (3) The virus progressively destroys the immune system; (4) HIV-1 isolates exhibit an enormous antigenic variability arising from the error-prone viral reverse transcription which can produce as much as 35% sequence diversity in gp120 between viral subtypes and 10% diversity in gp120 in a single infected individual.

Although an increasing number of broadly neutralizing Mabs have recently been isolated from infected human donors [22, 186–189], such antibodies are rarely induced by experimental immunization. It seems that during HIV-1 infection, the immune response is mostly directed against highly variable and accessible Env regions such as the V1, V2 and V3 loops rather than against functionally important but less accessible conserved domains such as the receptor and co-receptor binding sites. The propensity of the immune system to respond to immunodominant, strain-specific highly variable antigenic sites instead of to subdominant conserved epitopes that are able in principle to elicit a more broadly protective immunity, has been called deceptive imprinting because it allows the virus to escape immune pressure [190]. Attempts to overcome deceptive imprinting by redirecting the immune response to less strain-specific epitopes have been made using a strategy called immune refocusing. By introducing several new glycosylation sites into the V1 and V3 loops, it was possible for instance to obtain immunogens that induced a broader neutralization response that was effective against heterologous strains [191]. Some of the reported immunization results, however, are difficult to interpret because linear instead of cyclized loop peptides were used in inhibition experiments aimed at determining the specificity of the induced antibodies. Attempts have also been made to redirect the immune response to conserved neutralization epitopes by deleting some or most of the variable loops from Env, but the results were not satisfactory [192, 193]. Other approaches to overcome the problem of extensive antigenic variability include using as immunogen either artificial consensus sequences based on the most common amino acid in each position in an alignment [194, 195], or alternatively combinatorial convergent peptide libraries consisting of thousands of V3 peptides known as mixotopes that are recognized as a single entity by immune receptors [196]. Other strategies to deal with the existence of many antigenic variants by means of polyvalent vaccine cocktails have also been proposed [197]. Recent results have shown that the V3 loop may, in fact, be able to induce a neutralizing response against many different HIV-1 clades, indicating that a polyclonal response to V3 may have a much greater neutralizing breadth than that displayed by any single Mab or even a cocktail of Mabs [17, 173, 198].

Rational design versus empirical immunogenicity trials in HIV-1 vaccine development
A pervading theme in current vaccine research is the view that rational design offers the best prospects for the much needed development of effective vaccines against HIV-AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria [199–202]. In the case of HIV-1, this viewpoint has led to the claim that “rational design represents the only approach that can elevate vaccine research from an empirical exercise to a scientific discipline” [27]. It is argued here that such a view which denigrates the time-honoured empirical, trial-and-error approach that gave us all our present day effective vaccines is highly misleading and could even possibly jeopardize future efforts at developing an HIV-1 vaccine [107, 109].

It is not always clear what scientists mean when they refer to rational design and it may be helpful to briefly analyze these terms. The label rational tends to be used to describe any approach that relies on the probable outcome of an intervention as predicted from available scientific knowledge. The term rational is also used to describe common sense decisions such as focusing on known antigenic regions of a viral protein as primary targets for a vaccine [203]. Since all scientific work is based on reason, logic and currently accepted scientific theories, it makes little sense to oppose rational and empirical approaches since all scientific knowledge is derived from empirical observations made in the course of experiments that are necessarily planned and analyzed in a rational manner. It is therefore misleading to imply that trial-and-error experimentation is not rational since all novel findings and discoveries arise from the unpredictable outcome of controlled experiments rather than from purely rational, deductive thinking [107]. The term design can be defined as the deliberate and intelligent conceiving of an artificial object or process. The designer’s task is to pose and solve an inverse problem, namely to imagine on the basis of existing knowledge what would bring about a desired outcome [204]. Plausible solutions can only be tested by trial and error until the preset goal is attained [205]. Since scientists need to secure funding for their research, it is tempting for them to suggest that their current understanding of the complexity of the immune system is sufficient to allow them to design immunogens and to predict the type of antibodies they will elicit.

Rational design terminology implies that there is a causal relationship between the structure of an antibody and its function, giving rise to the assertion: “structure determines function”. Although it is true that a biological activity always depends on an underlying structure, the structure does not possess causal efficacy on its own in bringing about a certain activity. Causal relations are relations between successive events and not between two material objects nor between a structure and an event [206]. There is no unique causal relation between the structure of an antibody and its neutralizing capacity since the occurrence of neutralization is influenced by a large number of immunological and pathophysiological factors arising from complex interactions between antibody, pathogen, and host. The isolation of the potent neutralizing Mab VRC01 [154] and the elucidation of its structure [207], as well as the isolation of many additional broadly neutralizing antibodies from the serum of infected donors [187–189, 208, 209], has been interpreted as providing valuable molecular information that should facilitate rational vaccine design [210]. The search for additional broadly neutralizing Mabs has been stimulated by the finding that it is possible to provide sterilizing protection in non-human primates by administering neutralizing Mabs prior to viral challenge. However, this type of successful immunotherapy using neutralizing antibodies derived from infected individuals does not in any way tell us how such antibodies can be induced by vaccination. It is precisely our lack of knowledge regarding which immunogens are able to induce such antibodies in certain infected individuals which prevents us from developing an HIV-1 vaccine by design. Furthermore, the polyspecificity of antibody molecules and the degeneracy of the immune system imply that it is futile to search for the single “intrinsic” epitope of a neutralizing Mab and for the putative unique immunogenic structure capable of inducing protective antibodies. It has been claimed [185] that our failure to develop an HIV-1 vaccine is due to the fact that we do not understand what type of immune response is needed for protection. We can of course surmise that effective CD4, CD8 and B-cell responses are needed but this is of little help since we do not know how to elicit the required responses by immunization. One could also argue that studying the mechanism of a preventive or therapeutic HIV-1 vaccine will become possible only once an effective vaccination protocol has been discovered empirically. Figure 2 lists many of the questions that we need to answer if we want to be able to rationally design an HIV-1 vaccine [109, 185, 211]. It has been suggested that rational design may not be the best strategy to follow [212] since it is not possible, for instance, to predict which combination of several substitutions in a protein may lead to new desired properties that are not manifested when the protein presents only one substitution. This has led to the conclusion that an improved protein function is more likely to be obtained by successive rounds of random mutation, recombination and selection than by rational design [206 and references therein]. What is of course possible is to rationally design an antigen to fit a single Mab [154, 213] or to improve by molecular design the paratope binding efficacy of a Mab intended for passive immunotherapy. What is not possible is to rationally design an immunogenic molecule that will elicit a protective polyclonal antibody response of predetermined efficacy.Fig. 2 Unanswered questions regarding the factors and mechanisms believed to be important for inducing an effective HIV-1 vaccine immune response [185], reproduced with permission




The existence among HIV-1 subjects of long-term non-progressors (LTNPs) and elite controllers (ECs) has given rise to the hope that the elucidation of the mechanisms responsible for their occurrence may help HIV-1 vaccine design [214]. LTNPs which make up between 2 and 5% of all HIV-1 seropositive individuals [215] maintain low plasma levels of HIV-RNA and elevated CD4+ T cell levels whereas the even rarer EC individuals have undetectable levels of viral RNA. A combination of viral, genetic and immunological factors has been implicated in the ability of these slow progressors to control HIV-1 infection. The principal viral factor believed to slow disease progression is HIV-1 strain attenuation arising from mutations in viral accessory genes that cause a reduction in virus infectivity and replication [214]. If control of disease progression in these individuals results from an infection with attenuated, poorly replicating viruses, it is not clear how this could be made use of in vaccine development. The same applies to host genetic and immunological factors that promote control of infection such as chemokine receptor polymorphisms or the presence of certain protective HLA class I alleles in LTNP and EC individuals. Although some slow progressors have been shown to be able to induce broadly neutralizing antibodies against multiple HIV-1 strains [213, 216], the relevance of this anti-Env immune response to vaccine design is also not obvious since we do not know which immunogens were able to induce such as a response. It is, indeed, generally recognized that the major bottleneck in designing an HIV-1 vaccine lies in our ignorance of which immunogens are capable of inducing a broadly neutralizing immune response [22, 189, 201]. As discussed in this review, a successful design strategy requires that we should know which immunogens and immunological mechanisms are likely to lead to the appearance of protective immunity following vaccination. Unfortunately even a vaccine that induces high levels of neutralizing antibodies will not necessarily protect against virus infection [217]. Many investigators have recently stressed the need for embarking on large scale research programs in basic and preclinical immunology which they believe will give us the understanding required for designing vaccines [185, 201]. Although nobody would quarrel with the need for more basic research in immunology, the track record in vaccinology shows that effective vaccines in the past were always discovered by trial-and-error immunization trials rather than by rational design based on available structural and immunological knowledge. The widespread current expectation that discoveries in biomedicine and vaccinology are likely to result from structure-based molecular studies, “omics” type investigations [202] or systems biology approaches [218] rather than from empirical trials may well turn out to be counterproductive if it inhibits investigators from undertaking exploratory trial-and-error experiments. Empirical immunogenicity trials based on a less than perfect understanding of the complexities of the immune response and of the nature of dynamic and transitory HIV-1 epitopes may still be the key to discovering a promising HIV-1 vaccine candidate. Although epitope mapping with neutralizing Mabs and structural analyses may help investigators to identify which regions of the viral surface should be targeted by a vaccine, it must be emphasized that antigen mapping on its own will not lead to the discovery of vaccine immunogens that can only be revealed following experimental immunogenicity trials. Identifying the many cross-reactive epitopes that a neutralizing Mab can recognize is an entirely different task from discovering empirically which vaccine immunogens are able to induce a protective immune response.

Once an effective immunogen has been identified empirically, it may still take many years of basic research to establish its mechanism of action. As is the case with most present day successful vaccines, it is even conceivable that we may never fully understand why an empirically discovered vaccine is actually effective. This is a salutary reminder that discovering an effective vaccine empirically should have a higher priority than elucidating the mode of action of an ideal HIV-1 vaccine. Basic immunological research, therefore, should not stand in the way of rational immunogenicity trials nor should it restrict the financial resources that must be made available to implement them.

Conclusions
Creative imaginative thinking is required to choose credible candidate vaccines and to invent plausible hypotheses to help select judicious vaccine regimens, dosages, adjuvants, delivery routes and effective T cell help. Instead of misrepresenting experimental hypothesis testing as a case of rational design, it would seem preferable to openly acknowledge that the empirical testing of immunogens, which initially should take the form of small human trials, still offers the best hope of discovering an effective HIV-1 vaccine. There is increasing doubt that developing a preventive vaccine able to provide prophylactic immunity to stop HIV-1 infection occurring altogether is a realistic enterprise. There is indeed no evidence that it is possible to induce sufficiently high levels of broadly neutralizing antibodies at mucosal surfaces to achieve that aim. In recent years, much research has been directed instead to the development of therapeutic HIV-1 vaccines for treating people who are already infected with HIV-1. It has been shown, for instance, that immunization with the conserved HIV regulatory proteins, Tat, Rev and Nef, which are the first proteins expressed after HIV infection, is able to stimulate the immune system of patients receiving antiretroviral therapy, enabling them to partially control virus replication [30]. Other therapeutic vaccines are currently being investigated [219, 220] and it may become possible to assess their value more rapidly in the future by using so-called «adaptive trial designs» aimed at screening out poor vaccines while extending the evaluation of efficacious ones [221]. In addition, since many methods are now available to chemically inactivate HIV-1 while retaining the conformational and functional integrity of the gp proteins [29 and references therein], it may be justified to re-examine the possible value of a killed HIV-1 vaccine, provided the total innocuity of inactivated and genetically modified virus can be established.

The unexpected promising results of the Thailand “RV144” trial, initially condemned as ill-conceived and unjustified [222–225] but which turned out to be the first human vaccine trial showing modest protection against HIV infection [226, 227], demonstrate that empirical trials will always be needed since their outcomes are inherently unpredictable.

The author is grateful to Pernille Haste-Anderson of the Danish Technically University, Denmark for preparing Figure 1 (A, B) and to Florence Diemer for efficient secretarial assistance.
==== Refs
References
1. Klatt NR  Chahroudi A  Silvestri G   Mahy BWJ  Van Regenmortel MHV   Human immunodeficiency viruses: pathogenesis Desk encyclopedia of human and medical virology 2010 Oxford Academic Press, Elsevier 345 353 
2. Norrby E   Immunochemistry of AIDS 1993 Switzerland Karger 
3. Wyatt R  Kwong PD  Desjardins E    The antigenic structure of the HIV gp120 envelope glycoprotein Nature 1998 393 705 711 10.1038/31514 9641684 
4. Zolla-Pazner S   Identifying epitopes of HIV-1 that induce protective antibodies Nat Rev Immunol 2004 4 199 210 10.1038/nri1307 15039757 
5. Montero M  van Houten NE  Wang X  Scott JK   The membrane proximal external region of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope: dominant site of antibody neutralization and target for vaccine design Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2008 72 54 84 10.1128/MMBR.00020-07 18322034 
6. Hoxie JA   Toward an antibody-based HIV-1 Vaccine Annu Rev Med 2010 61 135 152 10.1146/annurev.med.60.042507.164323 19824826 
7. Poignard P  Moulard M  Golez E    Heterogeneity of envelope molecules expressed on primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 particles as probed by the binding of neutralizing and non neutralizing antibodies J Virol 2003 77 353 365 10.1128/JVI.77.1.353-365.2003 12477840 
8. Moore PL  Crooks ET  Porter L    Nature of nonfunctional envelope proteins on the surface of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 J Virol 2006 80 2515 2528 10.1128/JVI.80.5.2515-2528.2006 16474158 
9. Crooks ET  Moore PL  Franti M    A comparative immunogenicity study of HIV-1 virus-like particles bearing various forms of envelope proteins, particles bearing no envelope and soluble monomeric gp120 Virology 2007 366 245 262 10.1016/j.virol.2007.04.033 17580087 
10. Javaherian K  Langlois AJ  McDanal C    Principal neutralizing domain of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope protein Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989 86 6768 6772 10.1073/pnas.86.17.6768 2771954 
11. Muster T  Steindl F  Purtscher M    A conserved neutralizing epitope on gp41 of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 J Virol 1993 67 6642 6647 7692082 
12. Zwick MB  Labrijn AF  Wang M    Broadly neutralizing antibodies targeted to the membrane-proximal external region of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 glycoprotein gp41 J Virol 2001 75 10892 10905 10.1128/JVI.75.22.10892-10905.2001 11602729 
13. Poignard P  Saphire EO  Parren PW  Burton DR   gp120: biologic aspects of structural features Ann Rev Immunol 2001 19 253 274 10.1146/annurev.immunol.19.1.253 11244037 
14. Gorny MK  Williams C  Volsky B    Human monoclonal antibodies specific for conformation-sensitive epitopes of V3 neutralize human immunodeficiency virus type 1 primary isolates from various clades J Virol 2002 76 9035 9045 10.1128/JVI.76.18.9035-9045.2002 12186887 
15. Dhillon AK  Donners H  Pantophlet R    Dissecting the neutralizing antibody specificities of broadly neutralizing sera from human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected donors J Virol 2007 81 6548 6562 10.1128/JVI.02749-06 17409160 
16. Li Y  Migueles SA  Welcher B    Broad HIV-1 neutralization mediated by CD4-binding site antibodies Nat Med 2007 13 1032 1034 10.1038/nm1624 17721546 
17. Hioe CE  Wrin T  Seaman MS    Anti-V3 monoclonal antibodies display broad neutralizing activities against multiple HIV-1 subtypes PLoS One 2010 5 e10254 10.1371/journal.pone.0010254 20421997 
18. Zwick MB   The membrane-proximal external region of HIV-1 gp41: a vaccine target worth exploring AIDS 2005 19 1725 1737 10.1097/01.aids.0000189850.83322.41 16227780 
19. Zwick MB  Burton DR   HIV-1 neutralization: mechanisms and relevance to vaccine design Curr HIV Res 2007 5 608 624 10.2174/157016207782418443 18045117 
20. Willey S  Aasa-Chapman MM   Humoral immunity to HIV-1: neutralization and antibody effector functions Trends Microbiol 2008 16 596 604 10.1016/j.tim.2008.08.008 18964020 
21. Binley J   Specificities of broadly neutralizing anti-HIV-1 sera Curr Opin HIV AIDS 2009 4 364 372 10.1097/COH.0b013e32832e06fe 20048699 
22. Stamatatos L  Morris L  Burton DR  Mascola JR   Neutralizing antibodies generated during natural HIV-1 infection: good news for an HIV-1 vaccine? Nat Med 2009 15 866 870 19525964 
23. Burton DR   Antibodies, viruses and vaccines Nat Rev Immunol 2002 2 706 713.24 10.1038/nri891 12209139 
24. Burton DR   Scaffolding to build a rational vaccine design strategy Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010 107 17859 17860 10.1073/pnas.1012923107 20937874 
25. Schief WR  Ban YE  Stamatatos L   Challenges for structure-based HIV vaccine design Curr Opin HIV AIDS 2009 4 431 440 10.1097/COH.0b013e32832e6184 20048708 
26. Saphire EO  Parren PWHI  Pantophlet R    Crystal structure of a neutralizing human IgG against HIV-1: a template for vaccine design Science 2001 293 1155 1159 10.1126/science.1061692 11498595 
27. Karlsson-Hedestam GB  Fouchier RA  Phogat S    The challenges of eliciting neutralizing antibodies to HIV-1 and to influenza virus Nat Rev Microbiol 2008 6 143 155 10.1038/nrmicro1819 18197170 
28. Regenmortel MHV   Two meanings of reverse vaccinology and the empirical nature of vaccine science Vaccine 2011 29 7875 21888936 
29. Van Regenmortel MHV   Limitations to the structure-based design of HIV-1 vaccine immunogens J Mol Recognit 2011 24 741 753 10.1002/jmr.1116 21812050 
30. Caputo A  Gavioli R  Bellino S    HIV-1 Tat-based vaccines: an overview and perspectives in the field of HIV/AIDS vaccine development Int Rev Immunol 2009 28 285 334 10.1080/08830180903013026 19811313 
31. Atassi MZ  Smith JA   A proposal for the nomenclature of antigenic sites in peptides and proteins Immunochemistry 1978 15 609 610 10.1016/0161-5890(78)90016-0 83294 
32. Barlow DJ  Edwards MS  Thornton JM   Continuous and discontinuous protein antigenic determinants Nature 1986 322 747 748 10.1038/322747a0 2427953 
33. Sundberg EJ  Mariuzza RA   Molecular recognition in antibody-antigen complexes Adv Protein Chem 2002 61 119 160 10.1016/S0065-3233(02)61004-6 12461823 
34. Thali M  Olshevsky U  Furman C    Characterization of a discontinuous human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp120 epitope recognized by a broadly reactive neutralizing human monoclonal antibody J Virol 1991 65 6188 6193 1717717 
35. Moore JP  Ho DD   Antibodies to discontinuous or conformationally sensitive epitopes on the gp120 glycoprotein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 are highly prevalent in sera of infected humans J Virol 1993 67 863 875 7678308 
36. VanCott TC  Bethke FR  Burke DS    Lack of induction of antibodies specific for conserved, discontinuous epitopes of HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein by candidate AIDS vaccines J Immunol 1995 155 4100 4110 7561123 
37. Zwick MB  Kelleher R  Jensen R    A novel human antibody against human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp120 is V1, V2, and V3 loop-dependent and helps delimit the epitope of the broadly neutralizing antibody immunoglobulin G1 b12 J Virol 2003 77 6965 6978 10.1128/JVI.77.12.6965-6978.2003 12768015 
38. Laver WG  Air GM  Webster RG  Smith-Gill SJ   Epitopes on protein antigens: misconceptions and realities Cell 1990 61 553 556 10.1016/0092-8674(90)90464-P 1693095 
39. Van Regenmortel MHV   Reineke U  Schutkowski M   What is a B cell epitope? Epitope mapping protocols 2009 Springer Humana Press 3 20 
40. Hopp TP   Retrospective: 12 years of antigenic determinant predictions, and more Pept Res 1993 6 183 190 7691280 
41. Hopp TP   Different views of protein antigenicity Pept Res 1994 7 229 231 7535134 
42. Van Regenmortel MHV  Pellequer J-L   Predicting antigenic determinants in proteins: looking for unidimensional solutions to a three-dimensional problem? Pept Res 1994 7 224 228 7535133 
43. Ponomarenko JV  Van Regenmortel MHV   Gu J  Bourne PE   B cell epitope prediction Structural bioinformatics 2009 2 Hoboken John Wiley 849 879 
44. Greenbaum JA  Andersen PH  Blythe M    Towards a consensus on datasets and evaluation metrics for developing B-cell epitope prediction tools J Mol Recognit 2007 20 75 82 10.1002/jmr.815 17205610 
45. Zhang Q  Wang P  Kim Y  Haste-Andersen P    Immune epitope database analysis resource (IEDB-AR) Nucleic Acids Res 2008 36 W513 W518 10.1093/nar/gkn254 18515843 
46. Van Regenmortel MHV   Van Regenmortel MHV  Muller S   Molecular dissection of protein antigens and the prediction of epitopes Synthetic peptides as antigens 1999 Amsterdam Elsevier 1 78 
47. Chen S-WW  Van Regenmortel MHV  Pellequer J-L   Structure-activity relationships in peptide-antibody complexes: implications for epitope prediction and development of synthetic peptide vaccines Curr Med Chem 2009 16 953 964 10.2174/092986709787581914 19275605 
48. Muller S  Plaué S  Couppez M  Van Regenmortel MHV   Comparison of different methods for localizing antigenic regions in histone H2A Mol Immunol 1986 23 593 601 10.1016/0161-5890(86)90095-7 2427937 
49. Trifilieff E  Dubs MC  Van Regenmortel MHV   Antigenic cross-reactivity potential of synthetic peptides immobilized on polyethylene rods Mol Immunol 1991 28 889 896 10.1016/0161-5890(91)90053-M 1715031 
50. Getzoff ED  Tainer JA  Lerner RA  Geysen HM   The chemistry and mechanism of antibody binding to protein antigens Adv Immunol 1988 43 1 98 10.1016/S0065-2776(08)60363-6 3055852 
51. Geysen HM  Mason TJ  Rodda SJ   Cognitive features of continuous antigenic determinants J Mol Recognit 1988 1 32 41 10.1002/jmr.300010107 2483922 
52. Jemmerson R   Antigenicity and native structure of globular proteins: low frequency of peptide reactive antibodies Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987 84 9180 9184 10.1073/pnas.84.24.9180 2447585 
53. Spangler BD   Binding to native proteins by antipeptide monoclonal antibodies J Immunol 1991 146 1591 1595 1993848 
54. Lerner RA   Antibodies of predetermined specificity in biology and medicine Adv Immunol 1984 36 1 44 10.1016/S0065-2776(08)60898-6 6209966 
55. Darst SA  Robertson CR  Berzofsky JA   Adsorption of the protein antigen myoglobin affects the binding of conformation-specific monoclonal antibodies Biophys J 1988 53 533 539 10.1016/S0006-3495(88)83133-3 3382711 
56. Hafenstein S  Bowman VD  Sun T    Structural comparison of different antibodies interacting with parvovirus capsids J Virol 2009 83 5556 5566 10.1128/JVI.02532-08 19321620 
57. Van Regenmortel MHV   Plant virus serology Adv Virus Res 1966 12 207 271 10.1016/S0065-3527(08)60850-7 5333927 
58. Van Regenmortel MHV   The conformational specificity of viral epitopes FEMS Microbiol Lett 1992 100 483 487 1282485 
59. Neurath AR  Rubin BA   Viral structural components as immunogens of prophylactic value. Monographs in virology 1971 Basel Karger 
60. Van Regenmortel MHV  Neurath AR   Immunochemistry of viruses 1985 Amsterdam Elsevier 
61. Broder CC  Earl PL  Long D    Antigenic implications of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope quaternary structure: oligomer-specific and -sensitive monoclonal antibodies Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994 91 11699 11703 10.1073/pnas.91.24.11699 7972127 
62. Cho MW  Lee MK  Chen CH    Identification of gp120 regions targeted by a highly potent neutralizing antiserum elicited in a chimpanzee inoculated with a primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 isolate J Virol 2000 74 9749 9754 10.1128/JVI.74.20.9749-9754.2000 11000249 
63. Gorny MK  Stamatatos L  Volsky B    Identification of a new quaternary neutralizing epitope on human immunodeficiency virus type 1 virus particles J Virol 2005 79 5232 5237 10.1128/JVI.79.8.5232-5237.2005 15795308 
64. Bothner B  Dong XF  Bibbs L    Evidence of viral capsid dynamics using limited proteolysis and mass spectrometry J Biol Chem 1998 9 673 676 10.1074/jbc.273.2.673 
65. Yuan W  Bazick J  Sodroski J   Characterization of the multiple conformational states of free monomeric and trimeric human immunodeficiency virus envelope glycoproteins after fixation by cross-linker J Virol 2006 80 6725 6737 10.1128/JVI.00118-06 16809278 
66. Jerne NK   Immunological speculations Annu Rev Microbiol 1960 14 341 358 10.1146/annurev.mi.14.100160.002013 13789973 
67. Bou-Habib DC  Roderiquez G  Oravecz T    Cryptic nature of envelope V3 region epitopes protects primary monocytotropic human immunodeficiency virus type 1 from antibody neutralization J Virol 1994 68 6006 6013 8057475 
68. Poignard P  Klasse PJ  Sattentau QJ   Antibody neutralization of HIV-1 Immunol Today 1996 17 239 246 10.1016/0167-5699(96)10007-4 8991386 
69. Geysen HM  Rodda SJ  Mason TJ   A priori delineation of a peptide which mimics a discontinuous antigenic determinant Mol Immunol 1986 23 709 715 10.1016/0161-5890(86)90081-7 2432410 
70. Irving MB  Pan O  Scott JK   Random-peptide libraries and antigen-fragment libraries for epitope mapping and the development of vaccines and diagnostics Curr Opin Chem Biol 2001 5 314 324 10.1016/S1367-5931(00)00208-8 11479124 
71. Hanin V  Déry O  Boquet D    Importance of hydropathic complementarity for the binding of the neuropeptide substance P to a monoclonal antibody: equilibrium and kinetic studies Mol Immunol 1995 34 829 838 10.1016/S0161-5890(97)00119-3 
72. Van Regenmortel MHV   Mimotopes, continuous paratopes and hydropathic complementarity: novel approximations in the description of immunological specificity J Disper Sci Technol 1998 8 140 144 
73. Blalok J   Complementarity of peptides specified by “sense” and “antisense” strands of DNA Trends Biotechnol 1990 8 140 144 10.1016/0167-7799(90)90159-U 1369993 
74. Tropsha A  KizlerJS Chaiken IM   Making sense of antisense: a review of experimental data and developing ideas on sense-antisense recognition J Mol Recognit 1992 5 43 54 10.1002/jmr.300050202 1472380 
75. Yu MW  Scott JK  Fournier A  Talbot PJ   Characterization of murine coronavirus neutralization epitopes with phage-displayed peptides Virology 2000 271 182 196 10.1006/viro.2000.0310 10814583 
76. Malby RL  Tulip WR  Harley VR    The structure of a complex between the NC10 antibody and influenza virus neuraminidase and comparison with the overlapping binding site of the NC41 antibody Structure 1994 2 733 746 10.1016/S0969-2126(00)00074-5 7994573 
77. Lescar J  Pellegrini M  Souchon H    Crystal structure of a cross-reaction complex between Fab F9.13.7 and guinea fowl lysozyme J Biol Chem 1995 270 18067 18076 10.1074/jbc.270.30.18067 7629116 
78. Van Regenmortel MHV   Synthetic peptide vaccines and the search for neutralization B cell epitopes Open Vaccine J 2009 2 33 44 
79. Delmastro P  Meola A  Monaci P    Immunogenicity of filamentous phage displaying peptide mimotopes after oral administration Vaccine 1997 15 1276 1285 10.1016/S0264-410X(97)00072-8 9286056 
80. Puntoriero G  Meola A  Lahm A    Towards a solution for hepatitis C virus hypervariability: mimotopes of the hypervariable region 1 can induce antibodies cross-reacting with a large number of viral variants EMBO J 1998 17 3521 3533 10.1093/emboj/17.13.3521 9649423 
81. Larralde OG  Martinez R  Camacho F    Identification of hepatitis A virus mimotopes by phage display, antigenicity and immunogenicity J Virol Methods 2007 140 49 58 10.1016/j.jviromet.2006.10.015 17129616 
82. Schellekens GA  Lasonder E  Feijlbrief M    Identification of the core residues of the epitope of a monoclonal antibody raised against glycoprotein D of herpes simplex virus type 1 by screening of a random peptide library Eur J Immunol 1994 24 3188 3193 10.1002/eji.1830241241 7805747 
83. Steward MW  Stanley CM  Obeid OE   A mimotope from a solid-phase peptide library induces a measles virus-neutralizing and protective antibody response J Virol 1995 69 7668 7673 7494275 
84. Zwick MB  Bonnycastle LL  Menendez A    Identification and characterization of a peptide that specifically binds the human, broadly neutralizing anti-human immunodeficiency virus type 1 antibody b12 J Virol 2001 75 6692 6699 10.1128/JVI.75.14.6692-6699.2001 11413337 
85. Dorgham K  Dogan I  Bitton N    Immunogenicity of HIV type 1 gp120 CD4 binding site phage mimotopes AIDS Res Hum Retrovir 2005 21 82 92 10.1089/aid.2005.21.82 15665647 
86. Keller PM  Arnold BA  Shaw AR    Identification of HIV vaccine candidate peptides by screening random phage epitope libraries Virology 1993 193 709 716 10.1006/viro.1993.1179 7681612 
87. Boots LJ  McKenna PM  Arnold BA    Anti-human immunodeficiency virus type 1 human monoclonal antibodies that bind discontinuous epitopes in the viral glycoproteins can identify mimotopes from recombinant phage peptide display libraries AIDS Res Hum Retrovir 1997 13 1549 1559 10.1089/aid.1997.13.1549 9430247 
88. Scala G  Chen X  Liu W    Selection of HIV-specific immunogenic epitopes by screening random peptide libraries with HIV-1-positive sera J Immunol 1999 162 6155 6161 10229859 
89. Cohn M   A new concept of immune specificity emerges from a consideration of the self-nonself discrimination Cell Immunol 1997 181 103 108 10.1006/cimm.1997.1212 9398397 
90. Cohn M   Degeneracy, mimicry and cross-reactivity in immune recognition Mol Immunol 2005 42 651 655 10.1016/j.molimm.2004.09.010 15607824 
91. Langman RE   The specificity of immunological reactions Mol Immunol 2000 37 555 561 10.1016/S0161-5890(00)00083-3 11163391 
92. Cohen IR  Hershberg U  Solomon S   Antigen-receptor degeneracy and immunological paradigms Mol Immunol 2004 40 993 996 10.1016/j.molimm.2003.11.020 15036901 
93. Van Regenmortel MHV   From absolute to exquisite specificity. Reflections on the fuzzy nature of species, specificity and antigenic sites J Immunol Methods 1998 216 37 48 10.1016/S0022-1759(98)00069-6 9760214 
94. Mazumdar PH   Species and specificity 1995 Cambridge Cambridge University Press 
95. Landsteiner K   The specificity of serological reactions 1947 Cambridge Harvard University Press 
96. Talmadge DW   Immunological specificity, unique combinations of selected natural globulins provide an alternative to the classical concept Science 1959 129 1643 1648 10.1126/science.129.3364.1643 13668511 
97. Medawar PB  Medawar JS   The life science 1978 London Granada Publishing 
98. Bhattacharjee AK  Glaudemans CP   Dual binding specificities in MOPC 384 and 870 murine myeloma immunoglobulins J Immunol 1978 120 411 413 74386 
99. Ramsland PA  Guddat LW  Edmundson AB  Raison RL   Diverse binding site structures revealed in homology models of polyreactive immunoglobulins J Comput Aided Mol Des 1997 11 453 461 10.1023/A:1007932211514 9385549 
100. James LC  Roversi P  Tawfik DS   Antibody multi-specificity mediated by conformational diversity Science 2003 299 1362 1367 10.1126/science.1079731 12610298 
101. Jimenez R  Salazar G  Baldridge KK  Romesberg FE   Flexibility and molecular recognition in the immune system Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 100 92 97 10.1073/pnas.262411399 12518056 
102. Sperling R  Francus T  Siskind GW   Degeneracy of antibody specificity J Immunol 1983 131 882 885 6190944 
103. Parnes O   From interception to incorporation: degeneracy and promiscuous recognition as precursors of a paradigm shift in immunology Mol Immunol 2004 40 985 991 10.1016/j.molimm.2003.11.021 15036900 
104. Wucherpfennig KW  Allen PM  Celada F    Polyspecificity of T cell and B cell receptor recognition Semin Immunol 2007 19 216 224 10.1016/j.smim.2007.02.012 17398114 
105. Edelman GM  Gally JA   Degeneracy and complexity in biological systems PNAS 2001 98 13763 13768 10.1073/pnas.231499798 11698650 
106. Moodie SL  Mitchell JB  Thornton JM   Protein recognition of adenylate: an example of a fuzzy recognition template J Mol Biol 1996 263 486 500 10.1006/jmbi.1996.0591 8918603 
107. Van Regenmortel MHV   Molecular design versus empirical discovery in peptide based vaccines. Coming to terms with fuzzy recognition sites and ill-defined structure-function relationships in immunology Vaccine 1999 18 216 221 10.1016/S0264-410X(99)00192-9 10506645 
108. McNeil D  Freiberger P   Fuzzy logic 1993 New-York Simon and Schuster 
109. Van Regenmortel MHV   Pitfalls of reductionism in the design of peptide-based vaccines Vaccine 2001 19 2369 2374 10.1016/S0264-410X(00)00456-4 11257362 
110. Sadegh-Zadeh K   The fuzzy revolution: goodbye to the Aristotelian Weltanschauung Artific Intell Med 2001 21 1 25 10.1016/S0933-3657(00)00071-3 
111. Leng Q  Bentwich Z   Beyond self and nonself: fuzzy recognition of the immune system Scand J Immunol 2002 56 224 232 10.1046/j.1365-3083.2002.01105.x 12193223 
112. Efroni S  Cohen IR   Simplicity belies a complex system: a response to the minimal model of immunity of Langman and Cohn Cell Immunol 2002 216 23 30 10.1016/S0008-8749(02)00504-X 12381347 
113. Sandberg JK  Franksson L  Sundbäck J    T cell tolerance based on avidity thresholds rather than complete deletion allows maintenance of maximal repertoire diversity J Immunol 2000 165 25 33 10861031 
114. Foote J  Eisen HN   Kinetic and affinity limits on antibodies produced during immune responses Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 92 1254 1256 10.1073/pnas.92.5.1254 7877964 
115. Batista FD  Neuberger MS   Affinity dependence of the B cell response to antigen: a threshold, a ceiling, and the importance of off-rate Immunity 1998 8 751 759 10.1016/S1074-7613(00)80580-4 9655489 
116. Schroer JA  Bender T  Feldmann T  Kim KJ   Mapping epitopes on the insulin molecule using monoclonal antibodies Eur J Immunol 1983 13 693 700 10.1002/eji.1830130902 6193965 
117. Edwards BM  Barash SC  Main SH    The remarkable flexibility of the human antibody repertoire; isolation of over one thousand different antibodies to a single protein, BLyS J Mol Biol 2003 334 103 118 10.1016/j.jmb.2003.09.054 14596803 
118. Benjamin DC  Berzofsky JA  East IJ    The antigenic structure of proteins: a reappraisal Ann Rev Immunol 1984 2 67 101 10.1146/annurev.iy.02.040184.000435 6085753 
119. Berzofsky JA   Intrinsic and extrinsic factors in protein antigenic structure Science 1985 229 932 940 10.1126/science.2410982 2410982 
120. Tilley SA  Honnen WJ  Racho ME    Synergistic neutralization of HIV-1 by human monoclonal antibodies against the V3 loop and the CD4-binding site of gp120 AIDS Res Hum Retrovir 1992 8 461 467 10.1089/aid.1992.8.461 1376135 
121. Laal S  Burda S  Gorny MK    Synergistic neutralization of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 by combinations of human monoclonal antibodies J Virol 1994 68 4001 4008 7514683 
122. Zwick MB  Wang M  Poignard P    Neutralization synergy of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 primary isolates by cocktails of broadly neutralizing antibodies J Virol 2001 75 12198 12208 10.1128/JVI.75.24.12198-12208.2001 11711611 
123. Zhou T  Xu L  Dey B  Hessell AJ    Structural definition of a conserved neutralization epitope on HIV-1 gp120 Nature 2007 445 732 737 10.1038/nature05580 17301785 
124. Zwick MB  Parren PW  Saphire EO    Molecular features of the broadly neutralizing immunoglobulin G1 b12 required for recognition of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp120 J Virol 2003 77 5863 5876 10.1128/JVI.77.10.5863-5876.2003 12719580 
125. Loor F   On the existence of heterospecific antibodies in sera from rabbits immunized against tobacco mosaic virus determinants Immunology 1971 21 557 564 4107739 
126. Al Moudallal Z  Briand JP  Van Regenmortel MHV   Monoclonal antibodies as probes of the antigenic structure of tobacco mosaic virus EMBO J 1982 1 1005 1010 6203739 
127. Underwood PA   Theoretical considerations of the ability of monoclonal antibodies to detect antigenic differences between closely related variants, with particular reference to heterospecific reactions J Immunol Methods 1985 85 295 307 10.1016/0022-1759(85)90139-5 2416848 
128. Harper M  Lema F  Boulot G  Poljak RJ   Antigen specificity and cross-reactivity of monoclonal anti lysozyme antibodies Mol Immunol 1987 24 97 108 10.1016/0161-5890(87)90081-2 2441250 
129. Van Regenmortel MHV   Serological studies on naturally occurring strains and chemically induced mutants of tobacco mosaic virus Virology 1967 31 467 480 10.1016/0042-6822(67)90228-0 4960594 
130. Eisen HN   Specificity and degeneracy in antigen recognition: Yin and Yang in the immune system Ann Rev Immunol 2001 19 1 21 10.1146/annurev.immunol.19.1.1 11244028 
131. Berzofsky JA  Schechter AN   The concepts of cross-reactivity and specificity in immunology Mol Immunol 1981 18 751 763 10.1016/0161-5890(81)90067-5 6171727 
132. Roberts VA  Getzoff ED  Tainer JA   Van Regenmortel MHV   Structural basis of antigenic cross-reactivity Structure of antigens 1993 Boca Raton CRC Press 31 53 
133. Timmerman P  Puijk WC  Meloen RH   Functional reconstruction and synthetic mimicry of a conformational epitope using CLIPS technology J Mol Recognit 2007 20 283 299 10.1002/jmr.846 18074397 
134. Pantophlet R  OllmannSaphire E  Poignard P    Fine mapping of the interaction of neutralizing and nonneutralizing monoclonal antibodies with the CD4 binding site of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp120 J Virol 2003 77 642 658 10.1128/JVI.77.1.642-658.2003 12477867 
135. Parren PW  Burton DR   The antiviral activity of antibodies in vitro and in vivo Adv Immunol 2001 77 195 262 10.1016/S0065-2776(01)77018-6 11293117 
136. Van Regenmortel MHV   Immunoinformatics may lead to a reappraisal of the nature of B cell epitopes and of the feasibility of synthetic peptide vaccines J Mol Recognit 2006 19 183 187 10.1002/jmr.768 16680720 
137. Reading SA  Dimmock NJ   Neutralization of animal virus infectivity by antibody Arch Virol 2007 152 1047 1059 10.1007/s00705-006-0923-8 17516034 
138. Burton DR  Pyati J  Koduri R    Efficient neutralization of primary isolates of HIV-1 by a recombinant human monoclonal antibody Science 1994 266 1024 1027 10.1126/science.7973652 7973652 
139. Kwong PD  Wyatt R  Robinson J    Structure of an HIV gp120 envelope glycoprotein in complex with the CD4 receptor and a neutralizing human antibody Nature 1998 393 648 659 10.1038/31405 9641677 
140. Labrijn AF  Poignard P  Raja A    Access of antibody molecules to theconserved coreceptor binding site on glycoprotein gp120 is sterically restricted onprimary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 J Virol 2003 77 10557 10565 10.1128/JVI.77.19.10557-10565.2003 12970440 
141. Decker JM  Bibollet-Ruche F  Wei X    Antigenic conservation and immunogenicity of the HIV coreceptor binding site J Exp Med 2005 201 1407 1419 10.1084/jem.20042510 15867093 
142. Irving MB  Craig L  Menendez A    Exploring peptide mimics for the production of antibodies against discontinuous protein epitopes Mol Immunol 2010 47 1137 1148 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.10.015 20031219 
143. Saphire EO  Montero M  Menendez A    Structure of a high-affinity “Mimotope” peptide bound to HIV-1-neutralizing antibody b12 explains its inability to elicit gp120 cross-reactive antibodies J Mol Biol 2007 369 696 709 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.01.060 17445828 
144. Sattentau QJ  Moore JP   Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 neutralization is determined by epitope exposure on the gp120 oligomer J Exp Med 1995 182 185 196 10.1084/jem.182.1.185 7540648 
145. Van Regenmortel MHV   Mahy BWJ  Van Regenmortel MHV   Antigenicity and immunogenicity of viral proteins Desk encyclopedia of general virology 2010 Oxford Academic Press, Elsevier 343 349 
146. Berek C   Van Regenmortel MHV   Maturation of the immune response Structure of antigens 1992 Boca Raton CRC Press 149 157 
147. Harwood NE  Batista FD   Early events in B cell activation Ann Rev Immunol 2010 28 185 210 10.1146/annurev-immunol-030409-101216 20192804 
148. Rini JM  Schulze-Gahmen U  Wilson IA   Structural evidence for induced fit as a mechanism for antibody-antigen recognition Science 1992 255 959 965 10.1126/science.1546293 1546293 
149. Wilson IA  Stanfield RL   Antigen-antibody interactions: new structures and new conformational changes Curr Opin Struct Biol 1994 4 857 867 10.1016/0959-440X(94)90267-4 7536111 
150. Berger C  Weber-Bornhauser S  Eggenberger J  Hanes J  Plückthun A  Bosshard HR   Antigen recognition by conformational selection FEBS Lett 1999 450 149 153 10.1016/S0014-5793(99)00458-5 10350075 
151. Bosshard HR   Molecular recognition by induced fit: how fit is the concept?  News Physiol Sci 2001 16 171 173 11479367 
152. Goh CS  Milburn D  Gerstein M   Conformational changes associated with protein-protein interactions Curr Opin Struct Biol 2004 14 104 109 10.1016/j.sbi.2004.01.005 15102456 
153. Pantophlet R  Burton DR   Immunofocusing: antigen engineering to promote the induction of HIV-neutralizing antibodies Trends Mol Med 2003 9 468 473 10.1016/j.molmed.2003.09.001 14604823 
154. Wu X  Yang ZY  Li Y  Hogerkorp CM    Rational design of envelope identifies broadly neutralizing human monoclonal antibodies to HIV-1 Science 2010 329 856 861 10.1126/science.1187659 20616233 
155. Joyce JG  Hurni WM  Bogusky MJ    Enhancement of alpha-helicity in the HIV-1 inhibitory peptide DP178 leads to an increased affinity for human monoclonal antibody 2F5 but does not elicit neutralizing responses in vitro  J Biol Chem 2002 277 45811 45820 10.1074/jbc.M205862200 12237296 
156. Ho J  Uger RA  Zwick MB    Conformational constraints imposed on a pan-neutralizing HIV-1 antibody epitope result in increased antigenicity but not neutralizing response Vaccine 2005 23 1559 1573 10.1016/j.vaccine.2004.09.037 15694508 
157. Hans D  Young PR  Fairlie DP   Current status of short synthetic peptides as vaccines Med Chem 2006 2 627 646 17105445 
158. Thornton JM  Sibanda BL   Amino and carboxy-terminal regions in globular proteins J Mol Biol 1983 167 443 460 10.1016/S0022-2836(83)80344-1 6864804 
159. Westhof E  Altschuh D  Moras D    Correlation between segmental mobility and the location of antigenic determinants in proteins Nature 1984 311 123 126 10.1038/311123a0 6206398 
160. Tainer JA  Getzoff ED  Paterson Y    The atomic mobility component of protein antigenicity Ann Rev Immunol 1985 3 501 535 10.1146/annurev.iy.03.040185.002441 2415142 
161. Pellequer J-L  Westhof E  Van Regenmortel MHV   Wisdow GB   Epitope predictions from the primary structure of proteins Peptide antigens: a practical approach 1994 Oxford JRL 7 25 
162. Leinikki P  Lehtinen M  Hyöty H    Synthetic peptides as diagnostic tools in virology Adv Vir Res 1993 42 149 186 10.1016/S0065-3527(08)60085-8 
163. Walter G   Production and use of antibodies against synthetic peptides J Immunol Methods 1986 88 149 161 10.1016/0022-1759(86)90001-3 2420900 
164. Muller S   Van Regenmortel MHV  Muller S   Use of antipeptide antibodies in molecular and cellular biology Synthetic peptide as antigens  1999 The Netherlands Elsevier Amsterdam 215 235 
165. Blythe MJ  Flower DR   Benchmarking B cell epitope prediction: Under performance of existing methods Protein Sci 2005 14 246 248 10.1110/ps.041059505 15576553 
166. Caioli SE (2010) Benchmarking B-cell epitope prediction for the design of peptide-based vaccines: problems and prospects. J Biomed Biotechnol, vol 2010, article ID 910524, doi:10.1155/2010/910524
167. Langeveld JP  Casal JI  Osterhaus AD    First peptide vaccine providing protection against viral infection in the target animal: studies of canine parvovirus in dogs J Virol 1994 68 4506 4513 8207825 
168. Bittle JL  Hougten RA  Alexander H    Protection against foot-and-mouth disease by immunization with a chemically synthesized peptide predicted from the viral nucleotide sequence Nature 1982 298 30 33 10.1038/298030a0 7045684 
169. Rowlands DJ  Clarke BE  Carroll AR    Chemical basis of antigenic variation in foot-and-mouth disease virus Nature 1983 306 694 697 10.1038/306694a0 6318114 
170. Parry NR  Barnett PV  Ouldridge EJ    Neutralizing epitopes of type O foot-and-mouth disease virus. II. Mapping three conformational sites with synthetic peptide reagents J Gen Virol 1989 70 1493 1503 10.1099/0022-1317-70-6-1493 2471812 
171. Uversky VN  Oldfield CJ  Dunker AK   Showing your ID: intrinsic disorder as an ID for recognition, regulation and cell signaling J Mol Recognit 2005 18 343 384 10.1002/jmr.747 16094605 
172. Spear GR  Takefman DM  Sharpe S    Antibodies to the HIV-1 V3 loop in serum from infected persons contribute a major proportion of immune effect or functions including complement activation, antibody binding, and neutralization Virology 1994 204 609 615 10.1006/viro.1994.1575 7941328 
173. Jiang X  Burke V  Totrov M    Conserved structural elements in the V3 crown of HIV-1 gp120 Nat Struct Mol Biol 2010 17 955 961 10.1038/nsmb.1861 20622876 
174. VanCott TC  Polonis VR  Loomis LD    Differential role of V3-specific antibodies in neutralization assays involving primary and laboratory-adapted isolates of HIV type 1 AIDS Res Hum Retrovir 1995 11 1379 1391 10.1089/aid.1995.11.1379 8573396 
175. Kayman SC  Wu Z  Revesz K    Presentation of native epitopes in the V1/V2 and V3 regions of human immunodeficiency virus type 1gp120 by fusion glycoproteins containing isolated gp120 domains J Virol 1994 68 400 410 7504740 
176. Gorny MK  Williams C  Volsky B    Cross-clade neutralizing activity of human anti-V3 monoclonal antibodies derived from the cells of individuals infected with non-B clades of human immunodeficiency virus type J Virol 2006 80 6865 6872 10.1128/JVI.02202-05 16809292 
177. Stanfield R  Cabezas E  Satterthwait A    Dual conformations for the HIV-1 gp120 V3 loop in complexes with different neutralizing fabs Structure 1999 7 131 142 10.1016/S0969-2126(99)80020-3 10368281 
178. Rosen O  Chill J  Sharon M    Induced fit in HIV-neutralizing antibody complexes: evidence for alternative conformations of the gp120 V3 loop and the molecular basis for broad neutralization Biochemistry 2005 44 7250 7258 10.1021/bi047387t 15882063 
179. Mester B  Manor R  Mor A    HIV-1 peptide vaccine candidates: selecting constrained V3 peptides with highest affinity to antibody 447–52D Biochemistry 2009 48 7867 7877 10.1021/bi900146g 19552398 
180. Briand JP  Benkirane N  Guichard G    A retro-inverso peptide corresponding to the GH loop of foot-and-mouth disease virus elicits high levels of long-lasting protective neutralizing antibodies Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997 94 12545 12550 10.1073/pnas.94.23.12545 9356486 
181. Carver JA  Esposito G  Viglino P    Structural comparison between retro-inverso and parent peptides: molecular basis for the biological activity of a retro-inverso analogue of the immunodominant fragment of VP1 coat protein from foot-and-mouth disease virus Biopolymers 1997 41 569 589 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0282(19970415)41:5<569::AID-BIP8>3.0.CO;2-K 9095678 
182. Nargi F  Kramer E  Mezencio J    Protection of swine from foot-and-mouth disease with one dose of an all-D retro peptide Vaccine 1999 17 2888 2893 10.1016/S0264-410X(99)00127-9 10438060 
183. Hilleman MR   Impediments, imponderables and alternatives in the attempt to develop an effective vaccine against AIDS Vaccine 1992 10 1053 1058 10.1016/0264-410X(92)90115-Z 1471426 
184. Kusters I  Almond JW   Mahy BWJ  Van Regenmortel MHV   Vaccine strategies Desk encyclopedia of general virology 2010 Oxford Academic Press, Elsevier 381 389 
185. Virgin HW  Walker BD   Immunology and the elusive AIDS vaccine Nature 2010 464 224 231 10.1038/nature08898 20220841 
186. Scheid JF  Mouquet H  Feldhahn N    Broad diversity of neutralizing antibodies isolated from memory B cells in HIV-infected individuals Nature 2009 458 636 640 10.1038/nature07930 19287373 
187. Walker LM  Phogat SK  Chan-Hui P    Broad and potent neutralizing antibodies from an African donor reveal a new HIV-1 vaccine target Science 2009 326 285 289 10.1126/science.1178746 19729618 
188. Corti D  Langedijk JP  Hinz A    Analysis of memory B cell responses and isolation of novel monoclonal antibodies with neutralizing breadth from HIV-1-infected individuals PLoS one 2010 5 e8805 10.1371/journal.pone.0008805 20098712 
189. Mascola JR  Montefiori DC   The role of antibodies in HIV vaccines Annu Rev Immunol 2010 28 413 444 10.1146/annurev-immunol-030409-101256 20192810 
190. Nara PL  Garrity R   Deceptive imprinting: a cosmopolitan strategy for complicating vaccination Vaccine 1998 16 1780 1787 10.1016/S0264-410X(98)00168-6 9795381 
191. Tobin GJ  Trujillo JD  Bushnell RV    Deceptive imprinting and immune refocusing in vaccine design Vaccine 2008 26 6189 6199 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.09.080 18852005 
192. Lu S  Wyatt R  Richmond JF    Immunogenicity of DNA vaccines expressing human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope glycoprotein with and without deletions in the V1/2 and V3 regions AIDS Res Hum Retrovir 1998 14 151 155 10.1089/aid.1998.14.151 9462925 
193. Kim YB  Han DP  Cao C  Cho MW   Immunogenicity and ability of variable loop-deleted human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope glycoproteins to elicit neutralizing antibodies Virology 2003 305 124 137 10.1006/viro.2002.1727 12504547 
194. Gaschen B  Taylor J  Yusim K    Diversity considerations in HIV-1 vaccine selection Science 2002 296 2354 2360 10.1126/science.1070441 12089434 
195. McBurney SP  Ross TM   Human immunodeficiency virus-like particles with consensus envelopes elicited broader cell-mediated peripheral and mucosal immune responses than polyvalent and monovalent Env vaccines Vaccine 2009 27 4337 4349 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.04.032 19389453 
196. Gras-Masse H  Georges B  Estaquier J    Convergent peptide libraries, or mixotopes, to elicit or to identify specific immune responses Curr Opin Immunol 1999 11 223 228 10.1016/S0952-7915(99)80038-7 10322149 
197. Korber B  Gnanakaran S   The implications of patterns in HIV diversity for neutralizing antibody induction and susceptibility Curr Opin HIV AIDS 2009 4 408 417 10.1097/COH.0b013e32832f129e 20048705 
198. Pantophlet R  Aguilar-Sino RO  Wrin T    Analysis of the neutralization breadth of the anti-V3 antibody F425–B4e8 and re-assessment of its epitope fine specificity by scanning mutagenesis Virology 2007 364 441 453 10.1016/j.virol.2007.03.007 17418361 
199. Bramwell VW  Perrie Y   The rational design of vaccines Drug Disc Today 2005 10 1527 1534 10.1016/S1359-6446(05)03600-7 
200. D’Argenio DA  Wilson CB   A decade of vaccines: Integrating immunology and vaccinology for rational vaccine design Immunity 2010 33 437 440 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.10.011 21029955 
201. McElrath MJ  Haynes BF   Induction of immunity to human immunodeficiency virus type-1 by vaccination Immunity 2010 33 542 554 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.09.011 21029964 
202. Sette A  Rappuoli R   Reverse vaccinology: vaccines in the era of genomics Immunity 2010 33 530 541 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.09.017 21029963 
203. Obeid OE  Partidos CD  Howard CR  Steward MW   Protection against morbillivirus-induced encephalitis by immunization with a rationally designed synthetic peptide vaccine containing B- and T-cell epitopes from the fusion protein of measles virus J Virol 1995 69 1420 1428 7531779 
204. Bunge M   Philosophical dictionary 1993 Amherst, New York Prometheus Books 
205. Van Regenmortel MHV   The rational design of biological complexity: a deceptive metaphor Proteomics 2007 7 965 975 10.1002/pmic.200600407 17370255 
206. Van Regenmortel MHV   Reductionism and the search for structure-function relationships in antibody molecules J Mol Recognit 2002 15 240 247 10.1002/jmr.584 12447900 
207. Zhou T  Georgiev I  Wu X    Structural basis for broad and potent neutralization of HIV-1 by antibody VRC01 Science 2010 329 811 817 10.1126/science.1192819 20616231 
208. Binley JM  Lybarger EA  Crooks ET    Profiling the specificity of neutralizing antibodies in a large panel of plasmas from patients chronically infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 subtypes B and C J Virol 2008 82 11651 11658 10.1128/JVI.01762-08 18815292 
209. Gray ES  Taylor N  Wycuff D    Antibody specificities associated with neutralization breadth in plasma from human immunodeficiency virus type 1 subtype C-infected blood donors J Virol 2009 83 8925 8937 10.1128/JVI.00758-09 19553335 
210. Burton DR  Weiss RA   A boost for HIV vaccine design Science 2010 329 770 773 10.1126/science.1194693 20705840 
211. Ebensen T  Guzmàn CA   Immune modulators with defined molecular targets: cornerstone to optimize rational vaccine design Hum Vaccin 2008 4 13 22 10.4161/hv.4.1.5560 18376145 
212. Tobin MB  Gustafsson C  Huisman GW   Directed evolution: the ‘rational’ basis for ‘irrational’ design Curr Opin Struct Biol 2000 10 421 427 10.1016/S0959-440X(00)00109-3 10981629 
213. Villén J  Rodríguez-Mias RA  Núñez JI    Rational dissection of binding surfaces for mimicking of discontinuous antigenic sites Chem Biol 2006 13 815 823 10.1016/j.chembiol.2006.06.001 16931331 
214. Poropatich K  Sullivan DJ Jr   Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long-term non-progressors: the viral, genetic and immunological basis for disease non-progression J Gen Virol 2011 92 247 268 10.1099/vir.0.027102-0 21106806 
215. Okulicz JF  Marconi VC  Landrum ML    Clinical outcomes of elite controllers, viremic controllers, and long-term nonprogressors in the US Department of Defense HIV natural history study J Infect Dis 2009 200 1714 1723 10.1086/646609 19852669 
216. Simek MD  Rida W  Priddy FH    Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 elite neutralizers: individuals with broad and potent neutralizing activity identified by using a high-throughput neutralization assay together with an analytical selection algorithm J Virol 2009 83 7337 7348 10.1128/JVI.00110-09 19439467 
217. Mascola JR   Herpes simplex virus vaccines–why don’t antibodies protect? J Am Med Assoc 1999 281 379 380 10.1001/jama.282.4.379 
218. Pulendran B  Li S  Nakaya HI   System vaccinology Immunity 2010 33 516 529 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.10.006 21029962 
219. García F  Climent N  Assoumou L    A therapeutic dendritic cell-based vaccine for HIV-1 infection J Infect Dis 2011 203 473 478 10.1093/infdis/jiq077 21233310 
220. Li JZ  Brumme ZL  Brumme CJ    Factors associated with viral rebound in HIV-1-infected individuals enrolled in a therapeutic HIV-1 gag vaccine trial J Infect Dis 2011 203 976 983 10.1093/infdis/jiq143 21402549 
221. Corey L, Nabel GJ, Dieffenbach C et al (2011) HIV-1 vaccines and adaptive trial designs. Sci Trans Med 3: 79ps13
222. Burton DR  Desrosiers RC  Doms RW    A sound rationale needed for phase III HIV-1 vaccine trials Science 2004 303 316 10.1126/science.1094620 14726576 
223. McNeil JG  Johnston MI  Birx DL  Tramont EC   HIV vaccine trial justified Science 2004 303 961 10.1126/science.1096161 14963313 
224. Belshe R  Franchini G  Girard MP    Support for the RV144 HIV vaccine trial Science 2004 305 177 180 10.1126/science.305.5681.177b 15247455 
225. Jefferys R  Harrington M   Outstanding questions on HIV vaccine trial Science 2004 305 180 10.1126/science.305.5681.180a 15247456 
226. Rerks-Ngarm S  Pitisuttithum P  Nitayaphan S    Vaccination with ALVAC and AIDSVAX to prevent HIV-1 infection in Thailand New Engl J Med 2009 361 2209 2220 10.1056/NEJMoa0908492 19843557 
227. Letvin NL   Moving forward in HIV vaccine development Science 2009 326 1196 1198 10.1126/science.1183278 19965456

